“Perfect Questions - Perfect Answers” Conversations between His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada and Bob Cohen, a Peace Corps
worker in India.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this electronic
file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own private
use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation
copy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright
information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) of
this book in any media without the express written permission from the
copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Perfect Questions — Perfect Answers” by the
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”

This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3/764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.

Introduction

God, spiritual life-those were such vague terms to me before I met
Srila Prabhupada. I have always been interested in religion, but before
I met the Krsna conscious devotees, somehow I did not have the proper
perspective needed to inguire fruitfully about spiritual life. The
existence of a Creator is only common sense--but who is God? Who am I? I
had been to Hebrew School and had studied Oriental philosophy, but I
could never get satisfying answers to my questions.

I first heard the Hare Krsna mantra in Greenwich Village, New York,
in late 1968.

Hare Krsna Hare Krsna
Krsna Krsna Hare Hare
Hare Rama Hare Rama
Rama Rama Hare Hare

The chanting was captivating, and it made me feel very comfortable.
The mantra stuck in my mind, and I soon regretted that I had not taken a
magazine from the devotees. As explained to me later, a transcendental
seed had been planted that could eventually ripen into love of Godhead.

Several months later, I came across a card with the Hare Krsna
mantra on it. The card promised, "Chant these names of God, and your
life will be sublime!" I would occasionally chant, and I found that the
mantra did, in fact, give me a feeling of peace of mind.
After graduating from college with a B.S. in chemistry, I joined
the Peace Corps in 1971 and went to India as a science teacher. In India
I inquired about the Hare Krsna movement. I was attracted by the
chanting and intrigued by the philosophy, and I was curious about the
movement's authenticity. I had visited the Krsna temple in New York
several times before going to India, but I did not consider the
seemingly austere life of a devotee for myself.

In India I first met the Krsna conscious devotees at a festival
they were holding in Calcutta during October of 1971. The devotees
explained to me the purpose of yoga and the need to inquire about
Spiritual life. I began to feel that the rituals and ceremonies they
practiced were not dull, sentimental obligations, but a real, sensible
way of life.

At first, however, it was very difficult for me to understand the
philosophy of Krsna consciousness. In so many subtle ways, my Western
upbringing prevented me from seeing things that were as plain as the
nose on my face! Fortunately the devotees convinced me of the need to
practice some few basic austerities, and in this way I began to gain
some insight into spiritual life. I can now recall how distant and
tenuous were my concepts of spirituality and transcendental existence. I
met Srila Prabhupada briefly at this time--in November of 1971--and
shortly thereafter I decided to become a vegetarian. (I was proud of
being a vegetarian, but later Srila Prabhupada reminded me that even
pigeons are, too.)

In February of 1972, I met some devotees in Calcutta who invited me
to a festival in Mayapur (a holy island ninety miles to the north). The
festival was to be held in honor of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is
considered an incarnation of Krsna Himself. I had then been planning a
trip to Nepal, but the Peace Corps denied me permission to leave India,
and so I went to Mayapur.

I left for Mayapur planning to stay for two days at the most, but I
ended up staying a week. I was the only Western nondevotee on the
island, and since I was living with the devotees on their land, this was
a unique opportunity to learn intimately about Krsna consciousness.

On the third day of the festival, I was invited in to see Srila
Prabhupada. He was living in a small hut--half-brick and half-thatched,
with two or three pieces of simple furniture. Srila Prabhupada asked me
to be seated and then asked how I was and whether I had any questions.
The devotees had explained to me that Srila Prabhupada could answer my
questions because he represents a disciplic succession of spiritual
masters. I thought that Srila Prabhupada might really know what is going
on in the world. After all, his devotees claimed this, and I admired and
respected them. So with this in mind I began to ask my questions.
Inadvertently, I had approached a guru, or spiritual master, in the
prescribed way--by submissively asking guestions about spiritual life.

Srila Prabhupada seemed pleased with me, and over the next several
days, he answered my questions. I asked them mostly from an academic
point of view, but he always gave me personal answers so that I would
actually spiritualize my life. His answers were logical, scientific,
Satisfying and amazingly lucid. Before I met Srila Prabhupada and his
disciples, spiritual life was always obscure and nebulous. But the
discussions with Srila Prabhupada were realistic, clear and exciting!
Srila Prabhupada was patiently trying to help me understand that Krsna-God--is the supreme enjoyer, supreme friend and supreme proprietor. I
put forward many impediments to accepting the obvious: that I would have
to become serious about God consciousness to understand God. But Srila
Prabhupada relentlessly yet kindly urged me on. Even though I had little
ability to express myself, Srila Prabhupada understood my every inquiry
and answered perfectly.

Bob Cohen

Chapter One

Krsna, the All-Attractive

Bob: What 1S a scientist?

Srila Prabhupada: One who knows things as they are.

Bob: He thinks he knows things as they are.

Srila Prabhupada: What?

Bob: He hopes he knows things as they are.

Srila Prabhupada: No, he 1s supposed to know. We approach the scientist
because he is supposed to know things correctly. A scientist means one
who knows things as they are. Krsna means "all-attractive."

Bob: All-attractive.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So unless God is all-attractive, how can He be
God? A man iS important when he is attractive. Is it not?

Bob: It is so.

Srila Prabhupada: So, God must be attractive and attractive for all.
Therefore, if God has any name, or if you want to give any name to God,
only "Krsna" can be given.

Bob: But why only the name Krsna?

Srila Prabhupada: Because He's all-attractive. Krsna means"allattractive."

Bob: Oh, I see.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. God has no name, but by His qualities we give Him

names. If aman is very beautiful, we call him "beautiful." If aman is
very intelligent, we call him "wise.' So the name is given according to
the quality. Because God is all-attractive, the name Krsna can be
applied only to Him. Krsna means “all-attractive." It includes
everything.

Bob: But what about a name meaning "all-powerful"?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.... Unless you are powerful, how can you be allattractive?

Syamasundara: [an American devotee, Srila Prabhupada's secretary] It

includes everything.

Srila Prabhupada: Everything. He must be very beautiful, He must be very
wise, He must be very powerful, He must be very famous...

Bob: Is Krsna attractive to rascals?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes! He was the greatest rascal also.

Bob: How is that?

Srila Prabhupada: [laughing] Because He was always teasing the gopis.
Syamasundara: Teasing?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Sometimes when Radharani would go out, Krsna

would attack Her, and when She would fall down--"Krsna, don't torture Me
in that way"--They would fall down, and Krsna would take the opportunity
and kiss Her. [He laughs.] So, Radharani was very pleased, but

superficially Krsna was the greatest rascal. So unless rascaldom is in
Krsna, how could rascaldom be existent in the world? Our formula of God
is that He is the source of everything. Unless rascaldom is in Krsna,
how can it be manifest... because He is the source of everything. But
His rascaldom is so nice that everyone worships His rascaldom.

Bob: What about the rascals who are not so nice?

Srila Prabhupada: No, rascaldom is not nice, but Krsna is absolute. He
is God. Therefore His rascaldom is also good. Krsna is all-good. God is
good.

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: Therefore, when He becomes a rascal, that is also
good. That is Krsna. Rascaldom is not good, but when it is practiced by
Krsna, because He is absolutely good, that rascaldom is also good. This
one has to understand.

Bob: Are there some people who do not find Krsna attractive?

Srila Prabhupada: No. All people will find Him attractive. Who is not
attracted? just give an example: "This man or this living entity is not
attracted to Krsna."Just find such a person.

Bob: Somebody who wishes to do things in life that he may feel are wrong
but who wishes to gain power or prestige or money...

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob:... may find God unattractive. He may not find God attractive,
because God gives him guilt.

Srila Prabhupada: No, not God. His attraction is to become powerful. A
man wants to become powerful or rich--is it not? But nobody is richer
than Krsna. Therefore Krsna is attractive to him.

Bob: If a person who wants to become rich prays to Krsna, will he become
rich?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes!

Bob: He can become rich through this means?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. Because Krsna is all-powerful, if you pray to
Krsna to become rich, Krsna will make you rich.

Bob: If somebody lives an evil life but prays to become rich, he may
still become rich?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Praying to Krsna is not evil.

Bob: Oh, yes.

Srila Prabhupada: [chuckling] Somehow or other he prays to Krsna, so you
Cannot say that he is evil.
Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita, api cet suduracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak. Have you read it?

Bob: Yes. The Sanskrit I don't know, but the English I do.

Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m.

Bob: "Even if the most evil man prays to Me..."
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Bob: "... He will be elevated."

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. AS soon as he begins to pray to Krsna, that is
not evil. Therefore He is all-attractive. It is said in the Vedas that
the Absolute Truth, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the
reservoir of all pleasure--raso vai sah. Everyone is hankering after
someone because he realizes some mellow in it.

Bob: Excuse me?

Srila Prabhupada: Some mellow. Suppose a man is drinking. Why is he
drinking? He is getting some mellow out of that drinking. A man is
hankering after money because by possessing money he gets a mellow out
of it.

Bob: What does mellow mean?

Srila Prabhupada: [to Syamasundara] How do they define mellow?
Syamasundara: Taste, pleasure.

Bob: OK.

Srila Prabhupada: Pleasing taste. So the Vedas say, raso vai sah. The
exact translation of mellow is rasa. [Malati, Syamasundara's wife,

enters with a tray of food] What is that?

Malati:: Eggplant, fried.

Srila Prabhupada: Oh! All-attractive! All-attractive! [Laughter. ]
Syamasundara: How is Krsna the greatest scientist?

Srila Prabhupada: Because He knows everything. A scientist is one who
knows a subject matter thoroughly. He is a scientist. Krsna--He knows
everything.

Bob: I am presently a science teacher.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, teaching. But, unless you have perfect knowledge,
how can you teach? That is our question.

Bob: Without perfect knowledge, though, you can teach-
Srila Prabhupada: That is cheating; that 1s not teaching. That is
cheating. Just like the scientists say, "There was a chunk... and the
creation took place. Perhaps. Maybe..." What is this? Simply cheating!
It is not teaching; it is cheating.

Bob: Let me repeat what you said this morning--that was interesting. I
asked about miracles, and you said that only a fool would believe in
miracles because--let us say you are a child and an adult lifts this
table. That's a miracle. Or you're a chemist and you combine acid and
base and you make smoke, an explosion or whatever. To somebody ignorant,
that's a miracle. But for everything there 1S a process, and so when you
see a miracle, it's just ignorance of the process. So that only a fool
would believe in miracles, and--you correct me if I Say wrong...

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, yes.

Bob: You said when Jesus came the people then were somewhat more
ignorant and needed miracles as aid. I wasn't sure if that's quite what
you said.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, yes. Miracles are for the ignorant.

Bob: I had asked this in relation to all the miracle men you hear about
in India.

Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is the highest miracle man.

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: That is stated by Kunti...

Bob: Without perfect knowledge, can I not teach some things? For
example, I may-
Srila Prabhupada: You can teach up to the point you know.

Bob: Yes, but I should not claim to teach more than I know.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is cheating.

Syamasundara: In other words, he can't teach the truth with partial
knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. That is not possible for any human being. A human
being has imperfect senses. So how can he teach perfect knowledge?
Suppose you see the sun as a disc. You have no means to approach the
sun. If you say that we can see the sun by telescope and this and that,
they are also made by you, and you are imperfect. So how can your
machine be perfect? Therefore, your knowledge of the sun is imperfect.
So don't teach about the sun unless you have perfect knowledge. That is
cheating.

Bob: But what about to teach that it is supposed that the sun is
93,000,000 miles away?

Srila Prabhupada: AS soon as you say "it is supposed," it 1S not
scientific.

Bob: But I think that almost all science, then, is not scientific.
Srila Prabhupada: That is the point!

Bob: All science is based on, you know, suppositions of this or that.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. They are teaching imperfectly. Just like they are
advertising so much about the moon. Do you think their knowledge is
perfect?

Bob: No.

Srila Prabhupada: Then?

Bob: What is the proper duty of the teacher in society? Let us say a
science teacher. What should he be doing in the classroom?

Srila Prabhupada: Classroom? You should simply teach about Krsna.

Bob: He should not teach about...

Srila Prabhupada: No. That will include everything. His aim should be to
know Krsna.

Bob: Can a scientist teach the science of combining acid and alkaline,
and this kind of science, with Krsna as its object?

Srila Prabhupada: How can it be?

Bob: If you--when one studies science, one finds general tendencies of
nature, and these general tendencies of nature point to a controlling
force....

Srila Prabhupada: That I was explaining the other day. I asked one
chemist whether, according to chemical formulas, hydrogen and oxygen
linked together become water. Do they not?

Bob: It's true.

Srila Prabhupada: Now, there is a vast amount of water in the Atlantic
Ocean and Pacific Ocean. What quantity of chemicals was required?

Bob: How much?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. How many tons?

Bob: Many!

Srila Prabhupada: So who supplied it?

Bob: This was supplied by God.

Srila Prabhupada: Somebody must have supplied it.

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: So that is science. You can teach like that.

Bob: Should one bother teaching that if you combine acid and alkaline
they form a neutral?

Srila Prabhupada: The same thing. There are so many effervescents. So,
who is performing it? Who is supplying the acid and alkaline? [There is
a long pause. |]

Bob: So this comes from the same source as the water.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. You cannot manufacture water unless you have
hydrogen and oxygen. So, here 1S a vast--not only this Atlantic or
Pacific: there are millions of planets, and there are millions of
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. So who created this water with hydrogen and
oxygen, and how was it supplied? That is our question. Somebody must
have supplied it, otherwise how has it come into existence?

Bob: But should it also be taught how you make water from hydrogen and
oxygen? The procedure of burning them together--should this also be
taught? That is, you burn hydrogen and oxygen together...

Srila Prabhupada: That is secondary. That is not very difficult. Just
like Malati made this puri [a kind of bread]. So, there is flour, and
there is ghee [clarified butter], and she made a puri. But unless there
is ghee and flour, where is the chance of making a puri? In the
Bhagavad-gita there is this statement: "Water, earth, air, fire--they
are My energies." What is your body? This external body--that is your
energy. Do you know that? Your body 1s made out of your energy. For
example, I am eating...

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: So I am creating some energy, and therefore my body is
maintained.

Bob: Oh, I see.

Srila Prabhupada: So therefore your body is made out of your energy.
Bob: But when you eat the food, there is energy from the sun in the
food.

Srila Prabhupada: So, I am giving an example. I am creating some energy
by digesting the food, and that iS maintaining my body. If your energy
supply is not proper, then your body becomes weak or unhealthy. Your
body is made out of your own energy. Similarly, this gigantic cosmic
body--the universe--is made of Krsna's energy. How can you deny it? As
your body is made out of your energy, similarly the universal body must
be made by somebody's energy. That is Krsna. [There is a long pause. ]
Bob: I'll have to think about it to follow that.

Srila Prabhupada: What is to follow? It is a fact. [He laughs.] Your
hair 1S growing daily. Why? Because you have some energy.

Bob: The energy I obtain from my food.

Srila Prabhupada: Somehow or other you have obtained that energy! And
through that energy your hair is growing. So if your body is
manufactured by your energy, similarly the whole gigantic manifestation
is made of God's energy. It is a fact! It 1S not your energy.

Bob: Yes. Oh, I see that.

A devotee: Just like--aren't the planets in this universe the sun's
energy--a product of the sun's energy?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but who produced the sun? That is Krsna's energy.
Because it is heat, and Krsna says, bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh: "Heat--that
is My energy." The sun is the representation of the heating energy of
Krsna. It 1S not your energy. You cannot say, "The sun is made by me."
But somebody must have made it, and Krsna says that He did. So, we
believe Krsna. Therefore we are Krsna-ites.

Bob: Krsna-ites?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Our knowledge is perfect. If I say that heat is
the energy of Krsna, you cannot deny it, because it is not your energy.
In your body there iS some certain amount of heat. Similarly, heat is
someone's energy. And who is that person? That 1S Krsna. Krsna says,
"Yes, it is My energy." So my knowledge is perfect. Because I take the
version of the greatest scientist, I am the greatest scientist. I may be
a fool personally, but because I take knowledge from the greatest
scientist, I am the greatest scientist. I have no difficulty.

Bob: Excuse me?

Srila Prabhupada: I have no difficulty in becoming the greatest
scientist because I take the knowledge from the greatest scientist.
[There is a long pause.] "This earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence and ego--they are My eight separated energies."

Bob: They are separated energies?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Just like this milk. What is this milk? The
separated energy of the cow. [Syamasundara and Bob, stunned, laugh in
realization.] Is it not? It is the manifestation of the separated energy
of the cow.

Syamasundara: Is it like a by-product?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: So, what is the significance of this energy's being separated from
Krsna?

Srila Prabhupada: "Separated" means that this is made out of the body of
the cow but it is not the cow. That is separation.

Bob: So, this earth and all is made out of Krsna but it is not Krsna?
Srila Prabhupada: It is not Krsna. Or, you can say, Krsna and not Krsna
Simultaneously. That is our philosophy. One and different. You cannot
say that these things are different from Krsna, because without Krsna
they have no existence. At the same time, you cannot say, "Then let me
worship water. Why Krsna? The pantheists say that because everything is
God, whatever we do is God worship. This is Mayavada philosophy--that
because everything is made of God, therefore everything 1s God. But our
philosophy is that everything is God but also not God.

Bob: So what on earth is God? Is there anything on earth that is God?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Because everything is made out of the energy of
God. But that does not mean that by worshiping anything you are
worshiping God.

Bob: So what is on earth that is not maya [illusion]? It is...

Srila Prabhupada: Maya means "energy."

Bob: It means energy?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Maya--and another meaning is "illusion." So
foolish persons accept the energy as the energetic. That 1S maya. Just
like sunshine. Sunshine enters your room. Sunshine is the energy of the
sun. But because the sunshine enters your room, you cannot say that the
sun

Srila Prabhupada: Just wire.

Bob: So if I build a statue of Krsna, it is not Krsna unless...

Srila Prabhupada: It is Krsna. But you have to know the process of
understanding that it is Krsna. It is Krsna.

Bob: It is not just earth and mud.

Srila Prabhupada: No. Earth has no separate existence without Krsna.
Krsna says, “My energy." You cannot separate the energy from the
energetic. It 1s not possible. You cannot separate heat from fire. But
fire is different from the heat, and heat is different from the fire.
You are taking heat; that does not mean you are touching fire. Fire, in
Spite of emanating heat, keeps its identity. Similarly, although Krsna,
by His different energies, is creating everything, He remains Krsna. The
Mayavadi philosophers think that if Krsna is everything, then Krsna's
separate identity is lost. That 1s material thinking. For example, by
drinking this milk, little by little, when I finish, there is no more
milk; it has gone to my belly. Krsna is not like that. He is omnipotent.
We are utilizing His energy continually; still He is there, present.
Just like a man begetting children unlimitedly, but the man is there. A
crude example. It's not that because he has produced hundreds of
children, he is finished. So, similarly, God or Krsna, in spite of His
unlimited number of children, is there.

purnasya purnam adaya
purnam evavasisyate

"Because He is the complete whole, even though so many complete
units emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance." This is Krsna
consciousness. Krsna is never finished. Krsna is so powerful. Therefore
He is all-attractive. This is one side of the display of Krsna's energy.
Similarly, He has unlimited energies. This study of Krsna's energy is
only one side, or a portion only. So in this way, if you go on studying
Krsna, that is Krsna consciousness. It is not a bogus thing--"maybe,"
"oerhaps not." Absolutely! It is!

Syamasundara: And the study itself is never finished.
Srila Prabhupada: No. How can it be? Krsna has unlimited energy.

Chapter Two

Vedic Culture: Varnasrama-dharma

Bob: I've asked devotees about how they feel towards sex in their
relations, and I see the way they feel, but I can't see myself acting
the same way. See, I'll be getting married at the end of this summer.
Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m?

Bob: I'll be getting married at the end of this summer, in September or
August when I return to America. And the devotees say that the
householders only have sex to conceive a child, and I cannot picture
myself at all in such a position, and--What kind of sex life can one
lead, living in the material world?

Srila Prabhupada: The Vedic principle is that one should avoid sex life
altogether. The whole Vedic principle is to get liberation from material
bondage. There are different attachments for material enjoyment, of
which sex life is the topmost enjoyment. The Bhagavatam says that this
material world...

pumsah striya mithuni-bhavam etam

Man is attached to woman, and woman is attached to man. Not only in
human society--in animal society also. That attachment is the basic
principle of material life. So, a woman is hankering or seeking after
the association of a man, and aman is hankering or seeking for the
association of a woman. All the fiction novels, dramas, cinema and even
ordinary advertisements that you see simply depict the attachment
between man and woman. Even in the tailor's shop you will find in the
window some woman and some man.

pravrttir esa bhutanam
nivrttis tu mahaphalam

So this attachment is already there.
Bob: Attachment between man and woman?
Srila Prabhupada: Man and woman. So if you want to get liberation from
this material world, then that attachment should be reduced to nil.
Otherwise, simply further attachment--You will have to take rebirth,
either as a human being or as a demigod or as an animal, aS a serpent,
as a bird, as a beast. You will have to take birth. So, this basic
principle of increasing attachment is not our business, although it is
the general tendency. Grha, ksetra, suta [home, land, sons]. But if one
can reduce and stop it, that is first class. Therefore our Vedic system
is to first of all train a boy as a brahmacari--no sex life. The Vedic
principle is to reduce attachment, not to increase it. Therefore the
whole system is called varnasrama-dharma. The Indian system calls for
varna and asSrama--four social orders and four spiritual orders.
Brahmacarya [celibate student life], grhastha [married life],
vanaprastha [retired life] and sannyasa [renounced life]--these are the
Spiritual orders. And the social orders consist of brahmanas
[intellectuals], ksatriyas [administrators], vaisyas [merchants and
farmers] and sudras [ordinary workers]. So under this system, the
regulative principles are so nice that
even if one has the tendency to enjoy material life, he is so nicely
molded that at last he achieves liberation and goes back home, back to
Godhead. This is the process. So sex life is not required, but because
we are attached to it, therefore there are some regulative principles
under which it is maintained.
[chanting starts somewhere in the background, with exotic mrdanga
drumbeats amidst laughing and the loud blowing of horns. |]
Srila Prabhupada: It is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam that-
pumsah striya mithuni-bhavam etam
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
jJanasya moho 'yam aham mameti
(SB. 5.5.8)

This sex life is the basic principle of material life--attachment
for man or woman. And when they are united, when aman and woman are
united, that attachment becomes increased, and that increased attachment
will induce one to accumulate grha (a home), ksetra (land), suta
(children), apta (friendship or society) and vitta. Vita means money. In
this way--grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittaih--he becomes entangled. jJanasya
moho 'yam: this is the illusion. And by this illusion he thinks, aham
mameti: "I am this body, and anything in relationship with this body is
mine."

Bob: What is that again?

Srila Prabhupada: This attachment increases. The material attachment
involves thinking, "I am this body, and because I have this body ina
particular place, that is my country." And that 1S going on: "I am
American, I am Indian, I am German, I am this, I am that--this body.
This 1S my country. I shall sacrifice everything for my country and
society." So in this way, the illusion increases. And under this
illusion, when he dies he gets another body. That may be a superior body
or inferior body, according to his karma. So if he gets a superior body,
then that is also an entanglement, even if he goes to the heavenly
planets. But if he becomes a cat or dog, then his life is lost. Ora
tree--there is every chance of it. So this science is not known in the
world--how the soul is transmigrating from one body to another, and how
he is being entrapped in different types of bodies. This science is
unknown. Therefore when Arjuna was speaking--"If I kill my brother, if I
kill my grandfather on the other side..."--he was simply thinking on the
basis of the bodily concept of life. But when his problems could not be
solved, he surrendered to Krsna and accepted Him as spiritual master.
And when Krsna became his spiritual master, He chastised Arjuna in the
beginning:

asocyan anvasocas tvam
prajna-vadams ca bhasase

gatasun agatasums ca

nanusocanti panditah

"You are talking like a learned man, but you are fool number one
because you are talking about the bodily concept of life." So this sex
life increases the bodily concept of life. Therefore, the whole process
1s to reduce it to nil.

Bob: To reduce it over the stages of your life?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Reduce it. A boy is trained as a student up to
twenty-five years, restricting sex life. Brahmacari. So, some of the
boys remain naisthika-brahmacari [celibate for life]. Because they are
given education and they become fully conversant with spiritual
knowledge, they don't want to marry. That is also restricted--he cannot
have sex life without being married. Therefore in human society there is
marriage, not in animal society.

But people are gradually descending from human society to animal
society. They are forgetting marriage. That is also predicted in the
Sastras. Dampatye 'bhirucir hetuh: in the Kaliyuga [the present age of
quarrel], eventually there will be no marriage performances; the boy and
the girl will simply agree to live together, and their relationship will
exist on sexual power. If the man or the woman is deficient in sex life,
then there is divorce. So, for this philosophy there are many Western
philosophers like Freud and others who have written so many books. But
according to Vedic culture, we are interested in sex only for begetting
children, that's all. Not to study the psychology of sex life. There is
already natural psychology for that. Even if one does not read any
philosophy, he is sexually inclined. Nobody is taught it in the schools

and colleges. Everyone already knows how to do it. [He laughs.] That is
the general tendency. But education should be given to stop it. That is
real education. [There is a long pause, filled with the sound of bicycle

horns, children playing, and throngs of people calling to one another]
Bob: Presently, in America, that's a radical concept.

Srila Prabhupada: Well, in America there are so many things that require
reformation, and this Krsna consciousness movement will bring that. I
went to your country and saw that the boys and girls were living like
friends, so I said to my students, "You cannot live together as friends;
you must get yourselves married."
Bob: Many people see that even marriage is not sacred, so they find no
desire to marry. Because people get married, and if things are not
proper, they get a divorce so very easily-
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that also.

Bob:--that some people feel that to get married is not meaningful.
Srila Prabhupada: No, their idea is that marriage is for legalized
prostitution. They think like that, but that is not marriage. Even that
Christian paper--what is that? Watch--?

Syamasundara: Watchtower?

Srila Prabhupada: Watchtower. It has criticized that one priest has
allowed a marriage between two men--homosexuality. So these things are
all going on. They take it purely for prostitution, that's all. So
therefore people are thinking, "What is the use of keeping a regular
prostitute at such heavy expenditure? Better not to have this."
Syamasundara: You use that example of the cow and the market.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes--when the milk is available in the marketplace,
what is the use of keeping a cow? [Everyone laughs.] It is a very
abominable condition in the Western countries--I have seen it. Here also
in India, gradually it is coming. Therefore we have started this Krsna
consciousness movement to educate people in the essential principles of
Spiritual life. It 1S not a sectarian religious movement. It is a
cultural movement for everyone's benefit.

Chapter Three

The Real Goal of life

(continued)

Srila Prabhupada: This movement is especially meant to enable a human
being to reach the real goal of life.

Bob: The real goal... ?

Srila Prabhupada: The real goal of life.

Bob: Is the real goal of life to know God?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. To go back home, back to Godhead. That is the
real goal of life. The water that comes from the sea forms clouds, the
clouds fall down as rain, and the actual goal is to flow down the river
and again enter the sea. So, we have come from God, and now we are
embarrassed by material life. Therefore, our aim should be to get out of
this embarrassing situation and go back home, back to Godhead. This is
the real goal of life.

mam upetya punarjanma
dahkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhim paramam gatak

["After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion,
never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because
they have attained the highest perfection."] That is the version of
Bhagavad-gita. If anyone comes to Me--mam upetya: he does not come back
again. Where? To this place--dahkhalayam asasvatam. This place is the
abode of miseries. Everyone knows, but they have been befooled by socalled leaders. Material life is miserable life. Krsna says, God says,
that this place is dahkhalayam--it is a place of miseries. And it is
also asasvatam, temporary. You cannot make a compromise: "All right, let
it be miserable. I shall remain here as an American or Indian." No. That
also you cannot do. You cannot remain an American. You may think that,
having been born in America, you are very happy. But you cannot remain
an American for long. You will have to be kicked out of that place. And
your next life you do not know! Therefore, it is dahkhalayam asasvatam-miserable and temporary. That is our philosophy.

Bob: But when you have some knowledge of God, then life is not so
miserable?

Srila Prabhupada: No! Some knowledge will not do. You must have perfect
knowledge.

janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

Tattvatah means "perfectly." Perfect knowledge is being taught in
Bhagavad-gita. So, we are giving everyone in human society a chance to
learn Bhagavad-gita as it 1s and make his life perfect. That is the
Krsna consciousness movement. What does your science say about the
transmigration of the soul?

Bob: I think... that science... cannot deny or affirm it. Science does
not know it.

Srila Prabhupada: Therefore I say that science is imperfect.

Bob: Science may. though, say something. It iS said in science that
energy iS never destroyed; it is changed.

Srila Prabhupada: That's all right. But how the energy is working in the
future--that science does not know. How is the energy diverted? How, by
different manipulations, is the energy working differently? For
instance, electrical energy. By different handling it is operating the
heats and it is operating the refrigerator. They are just the opposite,
but the electrical energy is the same. Similarly, this energy--living
energy--how is it being directed? Which way is it going? How is it
fructifying in the next life? That they do not know. But in Bhagavadgita it is very simply stated.

vasamsSi jirnani yatha vihaya

You are covered by a dress, by a shirt. When this shirt is
unusable, you change it. Similarly, this body is just like a shirt and
coat. When it is no longer workable, we have to change it.

Bob: What is the "we" that has to change? What is constant?

Srila Prabhupada: That is the soul.

Bob: From one life to the next?

Srila Prabhupada: That is the soul--I. What "you" is speaking? You! What
"TI" as speaking? Identity: atma, or soul.

Bob: My soul is different from your soul?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. You are an individual soul, I am an individual
soul.

Bob: You have removed yourself from karmic influences. If I was to
remove myself from karmic influences, would our souls be the same or
different?
Srila Prabhupada: The soul is of the same quality in all. You are under
a certain conception of life at the present moment, and these countrymen
of yours [the Krsna conscious devotees] were under a certain conception
of life, but by training they have taken to another conception of life.
So the ultimate training is how to become Krsna conscious. That is the
perfection.

Bob: If two people are Krsna conscious, is their soul the same?

Srila Prabhupada: The soul is always the same.

Bob: In each person? In each person is it the same?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: [pointing to two devotees] If these two are Krsna conscious, are
their souls the same?

Srila Prabhupada: The soul is the same but always individual, even if
one 1S not Krsna conscious. For instance, you are a human being, and I
am a human being. Even if I am not a Christian, even if you are not a
Hindu, still we are human beings. Similarly, the soul may not be Krsna
conscious, or he may be Krsna conscious--it doesn't matter. But the soul
is the soul.

Bob: Can you tell me more about this?

Srila Prabhupada: Soul--as pure spirit, all souls are equal. Even in an
animal. Therefore it 1S said, panditah sama-darsinah: those who are
actually learned do not see the outward covering, either in a human
being or in an animal.

Bob: If I may ask another question on this?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: I have considered the soul somewhat as part of God. At times I
think I feel God. I'm here, and you may say God is here. So if the soul
1S inside me, then should I be able to feel God inside me? Not all of
God, I mean, but a...

Srila Prabhupada: Part of God.

Bob: But I don't feel God in me, but God may be here, separate--separate
from me. But should I be able to feel God inside me, since my soul is
Part of God?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. God is inside also. God is everywhere. God is
inside and outside also. This is to be known.

Bob: How do you feel God inside you?

Srila Prabhupada: Not in the beginning, but you have to know from the
Sastras [scriptures], by the Vedic information. For example, in the
Bhagavad-gita it 1S said, isvarah sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna
tisthati: God is there in everyone's heart. Paramanu-cayantara-stham:
God is also within every atom. So this is the first information. And
then, by the yogic process, you have to realize it.

Bob: Yogic process?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: Is chanting Hare Krsna such a yogic process?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, it is also a yogic process.

Bob: What kind of yogic process must I do to find out--to feel this
information--to feel the soul inside?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, there are many different yogic Processes, but for
this age this process is very nice.

Bob: Chanting.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: Through this I can feel not only God outside but God inside?
Srila Prabhupada: You'll understand everything of God--how God is
inside, how God is outside, how God is working. Everything will be
revealed. By this attitude of service, God will reveal Himself. You
Cannot understand God by your endeavor. Only if God reveals Himself. For
instance, when the sun is out of your sight at night, you cannot see it
by your torchlight, or any light. But in the morning you can see the sun
automatically. without any torchlight. Similarly, you have to create a
Situation--you have to put yourself in a situation--in which God will be
revealed. It 1s not that by some method you can ask God, "Please come. I
will see You." No, God is not your order carrier.

Bob: You must please God for Him to reveal Himself. Is that correct?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Syamasundara: How do we know when we are pleasing God?

Srila Prabhupada: When we see Him. Then you will understand. Just as,
when you eat, you do not require to ask anyone whether you are feeling
strength or your hunger is satisfied. If you eat, you understand that
you are feeling energy. You don't need to inguire from anyone.
Similarly. 1f£ you actually serve God, then you will understand, "God is
dictating to me. God is there. I am seeing God."

A devotee: Or God's representative.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Devotee: It comes easier.

Srila Prabhupada: You have to go through God's representative.

yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasadah

"By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the
mercy of Krsna." If you please God's representative, then automatically
God becomes pleased, and thus you can directly see Him.

An Indian gentleman: How to please God's representative?

Srila Prabhupada: You have to carry out his orders, that's all. God's
representative is the guru. He asks you to do this, to do that--1if you
do that, that is pleasing.

yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pi

"Without the grace of the spiritual master one cannot make any
advancement." If you displease him, then you are nowhere. Therefore we
worship the guru.

saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih

kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya
vanda guroh sri-caranaravindam

["The spiritual master 1s to be honored as much as the Supreme Lord
because of his being the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is
acknowledged by all revealed scriptures and is followed by all
authorities. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus
feet of such a spiritual master, who is a bona fide representative of
Lord Krsna."] The guru should be accepted as God. That is the injunction
of all sastra.

Bob: The guru should be accepted as a representative of God?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the guru is God's representative. The guru is the
external manifestation of Krsna.

Bob: But different from the incarnations of Krsna that come?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: In what way is the external manifestation of the guru different
from the external manifestation of, let us say, Krsna or Caitanya when
They come to earth?

Srila Prabhupada: The guru is the representative of Krsna. So there are
symptoms of who is a guru. The general symptoms are described in the
Vedas.

tad-vij-nanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
Samit-panih srotriyam brahma-nistham

A guru must come in a disciplic succession, and he must have heard
thoroughly about the Vedas from his spiritual master. Generally a guru's
symptom is that he is a perfect devotee, that's all. And he serves Krsna
by preaching His message.

Bob: Lord Caitanya--He was a different type of guru than you are?

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Gurus cannot be of different types. All gurus
are of one type.

Bob: But He was--was He also an incarnation at the same time?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, He is Krsna Himself, but He is representing the
guru.

Bob: I... I see.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: And then...

Srila Prabhupada: Because Krsna was God, He demanded:

Sarva-dharman parityaj-ya
mam ekam Ssaranam vraja

"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." But
people misunderstood Him. Therefore Krsna again came as a guru and
taught people how to surrender to Krsna.

Syamasundara: Doesn't He say in Bhagavad-gita, "I am the spiritual
master"?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, He is the original spiritual master because He
was accepted as spiritual master by Arjuna. So what is the difficulty?
Sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam. Arjuna told the Lord, "I am
Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me." So
unless He 1S a spiritual master how does Arjuna become His disciple? He
is the original guru. Tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye: "It is He only who
first imparted Vedic knowledge unto the heart of Brahma, the first
created being." Therefore He is the original guru.

Bob: Krsna.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. He is the original guru. Then His disciple Brahma
1s a guru, then his disciple Narada is a guru, then his disciple Vyasa
1S a guru--in this way there iS a guru-parampara [disciplic succession
of gurus]. Evam parampara--praptam: the transcendental knowledge is
received through the disciplic succession.

Bob: So a guru receives his knowledge through the disciplic succession,
not directly from Krsna? Do you receive some knowledge directly from
Krsna?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Krsna's direct instruction is there: Bhagavadgita.

Bob: I see, but...

Srila Prabhupada: But you have to learn it through the disciplic
succession, otherwise you will misunderstand it.

Bob: But presently you do not receive information directly from Krsna?
It comes through the disciplic succession from the books?

Srila Prabhupada: There is no difference. Suppose I say that this is a
pencil. If you say to him, "There is a pencil," and if he says to
another man, "This is a pencil," then what is the difference between his
instruction and my instructions?

Bob: Krsna's mercy allows you to know this now?

Srila Prabhupada: You can take Krsna's mercy also, provided it is
delivered as it is. Just as we are teaching Bhagavad-gita In Bhagavadgita Krsna says:

Sarva-dharman parityajya
nam ekam saranam vraja

"Just give up all other forms of religion and simply surrender unto
Me." Now we are saying that you should give up everything and surrender
to Krsna. Therefore, there is no difference between Krsna's instruction
and our instruction. There is no deviation. So if you receive knowledge
in that perfect way, that 1S as good as receiving instruction directly
from Krsna. But we don't change anything.
Bob: When I pray reverently, faithfully, does Krsna hear me?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Bob: From me to Him?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because He is within your heat He is always
hearing you--whether you are praying or not praying. When you are doing
some nonsense, He is also hearing you. And when you pray, that is very
good--welcome.
Bob: To Krsna's ear, 1S praying louder than nonsense?
Srila Prabhupada: No. He is all-perfect. He can hear everything. Even if
you don't speak, even if you simply think, "I shall do it," then He
hears you. Sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah: Krsna is seated in
everyone's heart.
Bob: But one should pray--is that so?
Srila Prabhupada: That is his business--praying.
Bob: Whose business?
Srila Prabhupada: Every living entity's. That is the only business. Eko
bahunam yo vidadhati kaman. That is the statement of the Vedas.
Bob: What does that mean?
Srila Prabhupada: He supplies everything to everyone. He is supplying
food to everyone. So He is the Father. So why should you not pray,
"Father, give me this"? Just as in the Christian Bible there is,
"Father, give us our daily bread." That is good--they are accepting the
Supreme Father. But grown-up children should not ask from the father;
rather, they should be prepared to serve the father. That is bhakti
[devotion].
Bob: My questions you solve so nicely. [Everyone laughs with affection. ]
Srila Prabhupada: Thank you very much.
Bob: So, should I ask you another question now?
Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. Yes!
Chapter Four

The Three Modes Of Nature

Bob: I have read that there are three gunas--passion, ignorance and
goodness--in life. I was wishing that you would explain this somewhat,
especially what is meant by the mode of ignorance and the mode of
goodness.

Srila Prabhupada: In goodness you can understand things--knowledge. You
can know that there is God, that this world was created by Him, and so
many things, actual things--the sun is this, the moon is this--perfect
knowledge. If one has some knowledge, even though it may not be perfect,
that 1S goodness. And in passion one identifies with his material body
and tries to gratify his senses. That is passion. And ignorance 1s
animal life--in ignorance, one does not know what is God, how to become
happy, why we are in this world. For example, if you take an animal to
the slaughterhouse, it will go. This is ignorance. But a man will
protest. If a goat is to be killed after five minutes but you give ita
morsel of grass, it 1s happy because it is eating. Just like a child-even if you are planning to kill her or kill him, he is happy and laughs
because he is innocent. That is ignorance.

Bob: Being in these modes determines your karma. Is that correct?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. According to the association of the modes of
nature, your activities are being contaminated.

karanam guna-sango 'Ssya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

A man gets a higher birth or lower birth according to the
association of the gunas, or the modes of nature.
Bob: So cheating and like that--what mode is that?
Srila Prabhupada: Cheating 1S mixed passion and ignorance. Suppose one
man cheats another. That means he wants to obtain something; he is
passionate. But if he commits murder, he does not know that he will have
to suffer for it, so it is a mixture of passion and ignorance.
Bob: And what about when somebody helps another person?
Srila Prabhupada: That is goodness.
Bob: Why is that goodness? What intelligence is that? I mean--this
represents knowledge of what? You said that goodness 1S when you have
knowledge.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Bob: Intelligence.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Bob: So helping another person?
Srila Prabhupada: That means that he is ignorant and you are trying to
enlighten him.
Bob: So giving intelligence...
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is goodness.
Bob: And what about just giving assistance?
Srila Prabhupada: That is also goodness.
Bob: If a beggar has nothing and you give him alms...
Srila Prabhupada: So that may still be goodness. But in your Bowery
Street, they give some charity, and immediately he purchases one bottle
of wine and drinks and lies down flat. [All laugh.] So that is charity.
But that 1S not goodness; that 1S ignorance.

Bob: Charity is ignorance?

Srila Prabhupada: There are three kinds of charities--good, passionate
and ignorant. Goodness is giving charity where charity must be given.
Just like this Krsna consciousness movement--if anyone gives charity to
this movement, that 1s goodness because it is spreading God
consciousness, Krsna consciousness. That 1s goodness. And if one gives
charity for some return, that is passion. And if somebody gives in
charity in an improper place and time, without respect and to an
unworthy person, just like the Bowery man, that iS ignorance. But Krsna
says:

yat karosi yad asnasi
ya} juhosi dadasi yat

"All that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give
away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as

an offering unto Me." If Krsna takes, that is the perfection of charity.
Or anyone who iS a representative of Krsna--if he takes, that is
perfection.

Bob: And what kind of charity is it when you give food to somebody who
1s hungry?

Srila Prabhupada: Well, that depends on the circumstances. For example,
a doctor has forbidden his patient to take any solid food, and if the
patient is asking, "Give me some solids," and if you give him solid food
in charity, then you are not doing good to him. That is ignorance.

Bob: Are the devotees beyond accumulating karma? These devotees--do they
feel karma? Do they work in these modes? Are they in the mode of
goodness?

Srila Prabhupada: They are above goodness! Suddha-sattva. The devotees
are not in this material world. They are in the spiritual world. That is
Stated in the Bhagavad-gita:

mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
Sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate

["One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall
down in any circumstances, at once transcends the modes of material
nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman."] Devotees are neither in
goodness, passion nor ignorance. They are transcendental to all these
Qualities.

Bob: A devotee who is very faithful reaches this stage?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Devotee... You can become a devotee as they have
become. It 1s not difficult. Simply you have to engage yourself in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, that's all.

Bob: I wish to gain more knowledge of God and be able to feel God's
presence more. The reason for this is because I feel life has little
meaning without this.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes! If you miss this human form of life, then it is a
great loss. That is a great chance given to the living entity to get out
of the entanglement of material existence.

Bob: I feel thankful that I've been able to ask these questions...

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you can learn more and more.

Bob: But I still have... my connections at home. Marriage is... I am

engaged....

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. There are so many marriages. [He indicates

Syamasundara.] He is married. Marriage is no barrier. I told you that

there are four different orders of spiritual life--brahmacari, grhastha,
vanaprastha and sannyasa. So after brahmacari life, one can marry. That
is not obligatory. One may remain naistika-brahmacari for his whole
life. But a brahmacari can marry. And after marriage, there is
vanaprastha life. This means that one is a little aloof from family--the
husband and wife live separately. At that time there is no sex life.
Then when he is fully renounced, detached from family life, he takes
Sannyasa,

Bob: Does somebody forget his wife completely then?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Forgetting is not very difficult, if you try to
forget. Out of sight, out of mind. [All laugh.] Just as I have my wife,
children, grandchildren--everything. But, out of sight, out of mind,
that's all. Therefore, vanaprastha, sannyasa--everything is nicely
arranged by the Vedic system.

Chapter Five

Becoming Pure

Bob: Thank you so much for allowing me to ask my questions.

Srila Prabhupada: That is my mission. People should understand the
science of God. Unless we cooperate with the Supreme Lord, our life is
baffled. I have given the example many times that a screw which has
fallen from a machine has no value. But when the same screw 1S again
attached to the machine, it has value. Similarly, we are part and parcel
of God. So without God, what is our value? No value! We should again
come back to our position of attachment to God. Then we have value.
Bob: I met a fellow today who came in the afternoon. His reason for
coming--you may find it humorous--was that he heard the hippies were in
Mayapur.

Srila Prabhupada: What?

Bob: He heard that hippies were in Mayapur. I was talking to him, and
then some devotees were talking to him. He had said some things to me
which I could find no answer for. And he said he would come back
tomorrow and meet some devotees. But let me tell you what he said. This
1s confusing. When he was young-
Srila Prabhupada: He's Indian?

Bob: Yes, Indian. He lives nearby and speaks English fairly well. When
he was young he worshiped Kali [a popular demigoddess] every day very
rigorously, and then the floods came. When the floods came, the people
saw hardship, and now he has no religion, and he says he finds his
happiness in trying to develop love among people. And I couldn't think
of what to say to him to add God and religion to his life. He says that
after he dies, "maybe I'll become part of God, maybe not," but he can't
worry about it now. He says he's tried these religious experiences, but
they didn't work. One reason I ask this is because when I go back to
America, a lot of people I come across are like this. They see that
religion, like his worship of Kali or other kinds of religion they've
experienced, doesn't work. And I don't know what to say to them to
convince them it's worth trying.

Srila Prabhupada: Do not try at the present moment. You try to be
convinced yourself.

Bob: Yes. I asked him to see devotees, but then on the way out, as he
was leaving down the road, I met him again and told him, "Come back,"
but... Oh, I see.

Srila Prabhupada: You first of all be convinced. And then try to
convince others. Caitanya Mahaprabhu's instruction is that you can
improve the welfare of others when your own life is a success:

bharata-bhumite haila manusya -janma yara
jJanma sarthaka kari 'kara para-upakara

First make your life perfect. Then try to teach others.
Bob: The devotees have told me that without consciousness of Krsna all
the time, you cannot be happy. But at times I feel happy.
Srila Prabhupada: At times. Not always.
Bob: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: But if you become Krsna conscious, you will feel happy
always.
Bob: They had implied that you cannot feel happy without Krsna
consciousness.
Srila Prabhupada: That is a fact. For example, if you are an animal of
the land and you are thrown into the water, you cannot be happy in water
in any condition. When you are again taken up a the land, then you'll be
happy. Similarly, we are part and parcel of Krsna. We cannot be happy
without being part and parcel of Krsna. The same example: the machine
part, without the machine, has no value, but when it is again put into
the machine it has value. We are part of Krsna; we must join Krsna. And
you can join Krsna immediately by your consciousness, simply by
thinking, "I am Krsna's, Krsna is mine:' That's all.
Bob: What is that? Krsna is...
Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is mine.
Bob: Mine?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Mine. My Krsna.

Bob: Ah.
Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is mine. Krsna is mine.
Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: And I am Krsna's. That 1S our actual position.

Bob: We are part of Krsna.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Everything 1S part and parcel of Krsna. Because
everything is generated by the energy of Krsna and everything is the
energy of Krsna.

An Indian gentleman: Srila Prabhupada, I have one question. What is the
Status of service minus devotion?

Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m? That is not service, that is business. [Everyone
laughs.] For example, here in Mayapur we have employed a contractor.
That 1S not service--that 1s business. Is it not? Sometimes they will
advertise, “Our customers are our masters." Is it not? But in spite of
the flowery language--"Our customers are our masters"--this 1s business,
because nobody is a qualified customer unless he pays. But service is
not like that. Service--Caitanya Mahaprabhu prays to Krsna:

yatha tatha va vidadhatu lampato
mat-prana-nathas tu sa eva naparah

"You do whatever You like, but still You are my worshipable Lord."
That is service. "I don't ask any return from You." That is service.
When you expect some return, that is business.
Bob: I wish to ask you to advise me on how I can come to feel closer to
God. I'll be leaving you soon. And I'm-Srila Prabhupada: You have to be purified.
Bob: I come to the temple at times, and then I leave, and I'm not sure
how much I take with me.
Srila Prabhupada: It does not take much time. Within six months you will
realize your progress. But you have to follow the regulative principles.
Then it will be all right. Just like these boys and girls are doing.
Bob: Yes, I see.
Srila Prabhupada: They have no tendency for going to the cinema or going
to a hotel. No. They have stopped all anarthas, all unnecessary things.
Bob: I--I feel that when I go back, they'll-Srila Prabhupada: The whole human life is meant for purification.
Bob: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada:

tapo divyam putraka yena sattvam
suddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam

Sattva means existence. So if you don't purify your existence, then
you will have to change your body. From this body to that. Sometimes it
may be higher, sometimes lower. For example, if you don't cure a
disease, it can put you into trouble in so many ways. Similarly. if you
don't purify your existence, then you will have to transmigrate from one
body to another. There are very subtle laws of nature. Now there is no
Guarantee that you will get a very comfortable body or an American body.
Therefore, it is essential for the human being to purify his existence.
Unless you purify your existence, you will hanker after happiness but
will not always be happy.

Bob: When I go to my job in New York, I hope I'll become pure, but I'm
sure that I won't become as pure as your devotees here. I--I don't see
myself doing that.

Srila Prabhupada: You can do as they are doing. They were not pure in
the beginning; now they are pure. Similarly. you can become pure. For
example, in your childhood you were not educated--but now you are
educated.

Bob: So, what are the things that I may do? When I go back, I must-Srila Prabhupada: When do you go back?

Bob: I'll be going back to Chaibasa to do my work there, and...

Srila Prabhupada: What is there in Chaibasa?

Bob: That 1s where I do my teaching. I live there.

want to see everyone happy. Sarve sukhino bhavantu. People do not know
how to become happy. They do not take the standard path to become happy.
They manufacture their own way. That is the difficulty. Therefore,
Rsabhadeva gave this advice to his sons: "My dear boys, just undergo
austerity for transcendental realization." Everyone is performing
austerity. This boy I know--he had to go to a foreign country to learn
commercial management. Now he is well situated. In this way. everyone
must undergo some austerity for future life. So why not take that
austerity for permanent happiness? You have to purify your existence and
your body. AS many times as you accept a material body, you will have to
change it. But aS soon as you get a spiritual body, there is no question
of change. You already have a spiritual body. Now, due to our material
contamination, we are developing the material body. But if we associate
with spiritual life, then we shall develop a spiritual body. The same
example I have several times given is that if you put an iron rod within
fire, it will become like fire. Is it not?

Bob: Put the iron rod into fire?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, and it will become like fire.

Bob: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: Although iron.
Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, if you always keep yourself spiritually
engaged, your body will act spiritually, although it is material. The
Same example: when an iron rod is red-hot, touch it anywhere, and it
will burn. It takes on the quality of fire. Similarly, if you always
keep yourself in Krsna consciousness, then you will become
Spiritualized. You will act spiritually. No more material demands.

Bob: How do I do this?

Srila Prabhupada: This process. They are doing it. You have seen these
boys, our six boys who have been initiated today. It is very simple. You
have to follow the four restrictive regulations and chant these beads.
Very easy.

Bob: Well, but, see--when I am back in Bihar and following my lifestyle
there, I--if I follow all these regulative principles--some I follow
now, but not all-
Srila Prabhupada: "Some" means... ?
Bob: "Some"?
Srila Prabhupada: There are only four regulative principles. "Some"

means three, or two?

Bob: Two or three.

Srila Prabhupada: So why not the other one?

Bob: No, no. I mean I follow one or two. One or two I follow now.

Srila Prabhupada: [Laughs.] Why not the other three? What is the
difficulty? Which one do you follow?

Bob: Which one do I follow? Well, I'm almost vegetarian, but I eat eggs.
Srila Prabhupada: Then that is also not complete.

Bob: No, not even complete. Since last time [November], I've become
vegetarian, but...

Srila Prabhupada: Vegetarian is no qualification.

Bob: Not much.

Srila Prabhupada: The pigeon is vegetarian. The monkey is vegetarian-the most rubbish creature...

Bob: Well...

Srila Prabhupada: The monkey is vegetarian. This naked sannyasi lives in
the forest... the most mischievous...
Bob: I--I felt that it was a little bit of progress because it was
somewhat difficult at first, then easy, and I had returned to-
Srila Prabhupada: No, you can stick to all the regulative principles,
provided you take to the Krsna consciousness process--otherwise it is
not possible.

Bob: Yes, this is it. I have--when I'm back in Bihar, and--um--my

friends may say... We're sitting in the evening, and there's nothing to
do but fight mosquitoes, and they say, “How about smoking some
marijuana?" And I say, "Sure, there's nothing else to do;" and then I

Sit down, and I enjoy myself for the evening. Now we did this, we got
Carried away. we were doing it every day and realizing we were hurting
ourselves and stopped, but still on occasion we...

Srila Prabhupada: You have to live with us. Then your friends will not
ask you, "What about marijuana?" [Bob laughs.] Keep the association of
devotees. We are opening centers to give people a chance to associate
with us. Why have we taken so much land [in Mayapur]? Those who are
seriously desirous--they will come and live with us. Association 1s very
influential. If you associate with drunkards, you become drunk; if you
associate with sadhus, then you become a sadhu. Syamasundara: He can
come and stay with you in Bombay.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you can stay with us in Bombay. But he wants
friends with marijuana. That is the difficulty.

Bob: Let me ask you about something else; then maybe I'll come back to
this. I find that I think of myself too much, and this way I can't think
of God so much. I think of myself in too many places. How can I forget
about myself so I can concentrate on other, more important things?
Srila Prabhupada: As they [the devotees] have done.

Bob: [Laughs.] You are saying to me that my path--I think what you're
Saying is that my path to purity 1s to become a devotee.

Srila Prabhupada: Do you hesitate?

Bob: Well, I...

Srila Prabhupada: Is it very difficult to become a devotee?

Bob: For myself--it is. I--I don't feel so much the desire. First the
devotees tell me that they have given up material life. These four
regulative principles, they have explained to me, mean giving up
material life, and that I see. And in place of this they have...

Srila Prabhupada: What do you mean by material life? [Bob is silent] I
am Sitting on this bed. Is it material or spiritual?

Bob: Material.

Srila Prabhupada: Then how have we given up material life?

Bob: I think how I interpreted it was "a desire for our material
gains..."

Srila Prabhupada: What is material?

Bob: Working towards material gains and not giving up all materials.
Srila Prabhupada: Material life means--when you desire to gratify your
senses, that is material life. And when you desire to serve God, that is
Spiritual life. That is the difference between material life and
Spiritual life. Now we are trying to serve our senses. But instead of
serving the senses, when we serve God, that is spiritual life. What is
the difference between our activities and others, activities? We are
using everything--table, chair, bed, tape recorder, typewriter--so what
is the difference? The difference is that we are uSing everything for
Krsna.
Bob: The devotees have said that the sensual pleasures they have given
up are replaced with spiritual kinds of pleasures, but--see--I haven't
felt this.

Srila Prabhupada: Spiritual pleasures come when you desire to please
Krsna. That iS spiritual pleasure. For example, a mother is more pleased
by feeding her son. She's not eating, but when she sees that her son is
eating very nicely, then she becomes pleased.

Bob: Hmm-m. Spiritual pleasure, then, is pleasing God.

Srila Prabhupada: Spiritual pleasure means the pleasure of Krsna.

Bob: Pleasing Krsna.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Material pleasure means the Pleasure of the
senses. That's all. This is the difference. When you simply try to
please Krsna, that is spiritual pleasure.

Bob: I had viewed this as--my thought of pleasing God was to-
Srila Prabhupada: Don't manufacture your ways of Pleasing God. Don't
manufacture. Suppose I want to please you. Then I shall ask you, "How
can I serve you?" Not that I manufacture some service. That is not
pleasing. Suppose I want a glass of water. If you concoct the idea,
"Svamiji will be more pleased if I give him a glass of milk, hot milk,"
that will not please me. If you want to please me, then you should ask
me, “How can I Please you?" And if you do what I order, that will please
me.

Bob: And pleasing Krsna, then, is being a devotee of Krsna.

Srila Prabhupada: A devotee is one who is always pleasing Krsna. He has
no other business. That is a devotee.

Bob: Can you tell me some more about chanting Hare Krsna? I have for
guite some time chanted, but never regularly--just a little bit here and
there. I just got beads very recently, and once ina while I feel
comfortable chanting, and once in a while not comfortable at all. Maybe
I don't chant Properly. I don't know.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, everything has a process. You have to adopt the
process.

Bob: The devotees tell me of the ecstasy they feel when chanting.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the more you become purified, the more you will
feel ecstasy. This chanting process is the purifying process.

“Perfect Questions - Perfect Answers” Conversations between His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada and Bob Cohen, a Peace Corps
worker in India.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this electronic
file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own private
use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation
copy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright
information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) of
this book in any media without the express written permission from the
copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Perfect Questions — Perfect Answers” by the
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3/764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.

Chapter Six

The Perfect Devotee

Syamasundara: Srila Prabhupada, this afternoon we were discussing
austerities.

Srila Prabhupada: Mm?

Syamasundara: If we don't practice austerities voluntarily, then we must
involuntarily practice some austerities.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, under the direction of the spiritual master one
Should... You have no mind to follow austerities, but when you accept a
Spiritual master, you have to carry out his order. That is austerity.
Syamasundara: Even if you don't want to practice austerity, you must.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you must. Because you have surrendered to your
Spiritual master, his order is final. So even if you don't like it, you
have to do it. To please me.

Syamasundara: Ah.

Srila Prabhupada: But you don't like... [He laughs.] Nobody likes to
fast, but the spiritual master says, "Today, fasting," so what can be
done? [Syamasundara laughs.] A disciple is one who has voluntarily

agreed to be disciplined by the spiritual master. That is austerity.
Syamasundara: Say, like our parents or many people in the material
world, completely enamored by the material life--they don't want to
undergo austerity or bodily pain, but still they must. They are being
forced by nature to suffer austerities.

Srila Prabhupada: That is forced austerity. That is not good. Voluntary
austerity will help.

Syamasundara: If you don't undergo voluntary austerity, then you must be
forced to undergo austerity.

Srila Prabhupada: That is the difference between man and animal. An
animal cannot accept austerity. But a man can accept it. There is a nice
foodstuff in the confectioner's shop, so a man wants to eat it, but he
sees that he has no money, so he can restrain himself. But when a cow
comes, immediately she pushes her mouth in. You can beat her with a
stick, but she will tolerate it. She will do that. Therefore an animal
cannot undergo austerity. Our austerity 1S very nice. We chant Hare
Krsna, dance, and Krsna sends very nice foodstuffs, and we eat. That's
all. Why are your people not agreeable to such austerity? Chanting,
dancing and eating nicely?

Bob: What is that?

Srila Prabhupada: Because we are following austerities, Krsna sends us
nice things. So we are not losers. When you become Krsna-ized, then you
get more comforts than at the present moment. That's a fact. I have been
living alone for the last twenty years, but I have no difficulties.
Before taking sannyasa I was living in Delhi. So I had no difficulties,
although I was living alone.

Syamasundara: If you don't accept spiritual discipline, then nature will
force so many calamities.

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita:

daivi hy esa gunamayl
mama maya daratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te

["This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of
material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have

Surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it."] Maya 1S imposing so
many difficulties, but as soon as you surrender to Krsna, no more
imposition.

Syamasundara: We were so foolish that we were always thinking, "In the
future I'll be happy."

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is maya, illusion. That is like the ass. You
Sit down on the back of the ass and just take a morsel of grass. The ass
is thinking, “Let me go forward a little, and I shall get the grass."
[Bob laughs.] But it is always one foot distant. That is ass-ism. [They
all laugh.] Everyone is thinking, "Let me go a little forward, and I'll
get it. I'll be very happy."

Bob: I... I thank you so much for...

Srila Prabhupada: Hmm?

Bob: Tomorrow I'll have to leave you and-
Srila Prabhupada: Don't talk l-e-a-v-e, but talk l-i-v-e.

Bob: I cannot yet, but I was thinking now of returning tomorrow to my
town. But...

Srila Prabhupada: Don't return.

Bob: I should stay here tomorrow-—here?

Srila Prabhupada: Stay here.

Bob: You tell me to, I'll stay.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you are a very good boy. [There is a long pause.
It is now, much quieter.] It 1s very simple. When the living entities
forget Krsna, they are in this material world. Krsna means His name, His
form, His abode, His pastimes--everything.

Bob: What was that last?

Srila Prabhupada: Ah? Pastimes.

Bob: Pastimes.

Srila Prabhupada: When we speak of a king, it means the king's
government, king's palace, king's queen, king's sons, secretaries,
military strength--everything. Is it not?

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, Krsna being the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as soon as we think of Krsna, this means all the energies of
Krsna. That 1s complete by saying, "Radha-Krsna." Radha represents all
the energy of Krsna. And Krsna is the Supreme Lord. So when we speak of
Krsna, the living entities are also included because the living entities
are energies, different energies of Krsna--Superior energy. So when this
energy is not serving the energetic, that 1S material existence. The
whole world is not serving Krsna. They are serving Krsna ina different
way. They are serving indirectly, just as disobedient citizens serve the
government indirectly. Prisoners come to the prison house on account of
their disobedience of the laws of the state. So, in the prison house,
they are forced to obey the laws of the state. Similarly. all the living
entities here are godless, either by ignorance or by choice. They do not
like to accept the supremacy of God. Demoniac. So we are trying to bring
them to their original condition. That is the Krsna consciousness
movement.

Bob: I'd like to ask you just something I talked with devotees about-medicine. I walked to the river with some devotees today. I have a cold,
so I said I shouldn't go in the water. Some felt I should because it is
the Ganges, and some said I shouldn't because I have a cold, and we were
talking, and I don't understand. Do we get sick because of our bad
actions in the past?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that's a fact.

Bob: But when one...

Srila Prabhupada: Any kind of distress we suffer is due to our impious
activities in the past.

Bob: But when someone is removed from karmic influence...

Srila Prabhupada: Yes?

Bob: ... does he still get sick?

Srila Prabhupada: No. Even if he gets sick, that is very temporary. For
instance, this fan is moving. If you disconnect the electric power, then
the fan will move for a moment. That movement is not due to the electric
current. That is force--what is it called, physically, this force?
Syamasundara: Momentum.

Srila Prabhupada: Momentum. But as soon as it stops, no more movement.
Similarly, even if a devotee who has surrendered to Krsna is suffering
from material consequences, that 1S temporary. Therefore, a devotee does
not take any material miseries as miseries. He takes them as Krsna's,
God's, mercy.

Bob: A perfected soul, a devotee, a pure devotee...

Srila Prabhupada: A perfected soul is one who engages twenty-four hours
a day in Krsna consciousness. That is perfection. That is a
transcendental position. Perfection means to engage in one's original
consciousness. That 1s perfection. That is stated in Bhagavad-gita:

sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narah

"By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect."
Complete perfection. Samsiddhi. Siddhi is perfection. That is Brahman
realization, spiritual realization. And samsiddhi means devotion, which
comes after Brahman realization.

Bob: Could you just say that last thing again please?
Srila Prabhupada: Samsiddhi.

Bob: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: Sam means complete.
Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: And siddhi means perfection. In the Bhagavad-gita it
1s stated that one who goes back home, back to Godhead, has attained the
complete perfection. So perfection comes when one realizes that he is
not this body; he is spirit soul. Brahma-bhuta--that is called Brahman
realization. That is perfection. And samsiddhi comes after Brahman
realization, when one engages in devotional service. Therefore if one is
already engaged in devotional service, it 1S to be understood that
Brahman realization is there. Therefore it is called samsiddhi.

Bob: I ask you this very humbly, but do you feel diseases and sickness?
Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m?

Bob: Do you personally feel disease and sickness?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: Is this a result of your past karma?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: So one in this material world never escapes his karma completely?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, he escapes. No more karma for a devotee. No more
karmic reaction.

Bob: But you must be the best devotee.

Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m... No, I don't consider myself the best devotee.
I am the lowest.

Bob: No!

Srila Prabhupada: You are the best devotee.

Bob: [Laughs.] Oh, no, no! But, see, you say--what you say... always

seems right.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: Then you must be the best devotee.

Srila Prabhupada: The thing is that even the best devotee, when he
preaches, comes to the second-class platform of a devotee.

Bob: What would the best devotee be doing?

Srila Prabhupada: The best devotee does not preach.

Bob: What does he do?

Srila Prabhupada: He sees that there is no need of preaching. For him,
everyone is a devotee. [Bob laughs heartily] Yes, he sees no more
nondevotees--all devotees. He is called an utama-adhikari. But while I
am preaching, how can I say I am the best devotee? Just like Radharani-She does not see anyone as a nondevotee. Therefore we try to approach
Radharani.

Bob: Who is this?

Srila Prabhupada: Radharani, Krsna's consort.

Bob: Ah.

Srila Prabhupada: If anyone approaches Radharani, She recommends to
Krsna, “Here is the best devotee. He is better than Me," and Krsna
cannot refuse him. That is the best devotee. But it is not to be
imitated: "I have become the best devotee."

isvare tad-adhinesu
balisesu dvisatsu ca
prema-maitri-krpepeksa
yah karoti sa madhyamah
(SB. 11.2.46)

A second-class devotee has the vision that some are envious of God,
but this is not the vision of the best devotee. The best devotee sees,
"Nobody 1S envious of God. Everyone is better than me." Just like
Caitanya-caritamrta's author, Krsnadasa Kaviraja. He says, "I am lower
than the worm in the stool."

Bob: Who is saying this?
Srila Prabhupada: Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the author of Caitanya-caritamrta:
purisera kita haite muni se laghistha. He is not making a show. He is
feeling like that. "I am the lowest. Everyone is best, but I am the
lowest. Everyone 1S engaged in Krsna's service. I am not engaged."
Caitanya Mahaprabhu said "Oh, I have not a pinch of devotion to Krsna. I
cry to make a show. If I had been a devotee of Krsna, I would have died
long ago. But I am living. That is the proof that I do not love Krsna."
That 1s the vision of the best devotee. He 1S so much absorbed in
Krsna's love that he says, "Everything is going on, but I am the lowest.
Therefore I cannot see God." That is the best devotee.

Bob: So a devotee must work for everybody's liberation?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. A devotee must work under the direction of a bona
fide spiritual master, not imitate the best devotee.

Bob: Excuse me?

Srila Prabhupada: One should not imitate the best devotee.

Bob: Imitate. Oh. I see.

Syamasundara: One time you said that sometimes you feel sickness or pain
due to the sinful activities of your devotees. Can sometimes disease be
due to that? Caused by that?

Srila Prabhupada: You see, Krsna says:

aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyamil ma sucah

"T will deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." So
Krsna is so powerful that He can immediately take up all the sins of
others and immediately make them right. But when a living entity plays
the part on behalf of Krsna, he also takes the responsibility for the
Sinful activities of his devotees. Therefore to become a guru is not an
easy task. You see? He has to take all the poisons and absorb them. So
sometimes--because he is not Krsna--sometimes there 1S some trouble.
Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu has forbidden, "Don't make many sisyas,
many disciples." But for preaching work we have to accept many
disciples--for expanding preaching--even if we suffer. That's a fact.
The spiritual master has to take the responsibility for all the sinful
activities of his disciples. Therefore to make many disciples is a risky
Job unless one is able to assimilate all the sins.

vancha-kalpa-tarubhyas ca

kipa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanam pavanebhyo

vaisnavebhyo namo namah

["I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees
of the Lord. They are just like desire trees who can fulfill the desires
of everyone, and they are full of compassion for the fallen conditioned
souls."] He takes responsibility for all the fallen souls. That idea is
also in the Bible. Jesus Christ took all the sinful reactions of the
people and sacrificed his life. That is the responsibility of a
Spiritual master. Because Krsna is Krsna, He is apapa-viddha--He cannot
be attacked by sinful reactions. But a living entity is sometimes
subjected to their influence because he is so small. Big fire, small
fire. If you put some big thing ina small fire, the fire itself may be
extinguished. But ina big fire, whatever you put in is all right. The
big fire can consume anything.

Bob: Christ's suffering was of that nature?

Srila Prabhupada: Mm-m?

Bob: Was Christ's suffering-
Srila Prabhupada: That I have already explained. He took the sinful
reactions of all the people. Therefore he suffered.

Bob: I see.

Srila Prabhupada: He said--that is in the Bible--that he took all the
Sinful reactions of the people and sacrificed his life. But these
Christian people have made it a law for Christ to suffer while they do
all nonsense. [Bob gives a short laugh.] Such great fools they are! They
have let Jesus Christ make a contract for taking all their sinful
reactions so they can go on with all nonsense. That is their religion.
Christ was so magnanimous that he took all their sins and suffered, but
that does not induce them to stop all these sins. They have not come to
that sense. They have taken it very easily. "Let Lord Jesus Christ
suffer, and we'll do all nonsense." Is it not?

Bob: It 18S So.

Srila Prabhupada: They should have been ashamed: "Lord Jesus Christ
suffered for us, but we are continuing the sinful activities." He told
everyone, "Thou shalt not kill," but they are indulging in killing,
thinking, "Lord Jesus Christ will excuse us and take all the sinful
reactions." This is going on. We should be very much cautious: "For my
Sinful actions my spiritual master will suffer, so I'll not commit even
a pinch of sinful activities." That is the duty of the disciple. After
initiation, all sinful reaction is finished. Now if he again commits
Sinful activities, his spiritual master has to suffer. A disciple should
be sympathetic and consider this. "For my sinful activities, my
Spiritual master will suffer." If the spiritual master is attacked by
some disease, it is due to the sinful activities of others. "Don't make
many disciples." But we do it because we are preaching. Never mind--let
us suffer--still we shall accept them. Therefore your question was--when
I suffer is it due to my past misdeeds? Was it not? That is my misdeed-that I accepted some disciples who are nonsense. That is my misdeed.
Bob: This happens on occasions?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. This is sure to happen because we are accepting
so many men. It is the duty of the disciples to be cautious. "My
Spiritual master has saved me. I should not put him again into
suffering." When the spiritual master 1s in suffering, Krsna saves him.
Krsna thinks, "Oh, he has taken so much responsibility for delivering a
fallen person." So Krsna is there.

kauntea pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranasyati

["O son of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never
perishes."] Because the spiritual master takes the risk on account of
Krsna.

Bob: Your suffering is not the same kind of pain...

Srila Prabhupada: No, it is not due to karma. The pain is there
sometimes, so that the disciples may know, "Due to our sinful
activities, our spiritual master is suffering."

Bob: You look very well now.
Srila Prabhupada: I am always well... in the sense that even if there is
suffering, I know Krsna will protect me. But this suffering 1s not due
to my sinful activities.

Bob: But let us say when I--1in the town I live in, I take boiled water
because some of the water has disease in it. Now, why should I drink
boiled water if I have been good enough not to get a disease? Then I may
drink any water. And if I have been not acting properly. then I shall
get disease anyway.

Srila Prabhupada: So long as you are in the material world, you cannot
neglect physical laws. Suppose you go to a jungle and there is a tiger.
It 1s known that it will attack you, so why should you voluntarily go
and be attacked? It is not that a devotee should take physical risk so
long as he has a physical body. It 1s not a challenge to the physical
laws: "I have become a devotee. I challenge everything." That is
foolishness.

anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunj-atah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

The devotee is advised to accept the necessities of life without
attachment. He'll take boiled water, but if boiled water is not
available, does it mean he will not drink water? If it is not available,
he will drink ordinary water. We take Krsna prasada, but while touring,
sometimes we have to take some food in a hotel. Because one is a
devotee, should he think, "I will not take any foodstuffs from the
hotel. I shall starve"? If I starve, then I will be weak and will not be
able to preach.

Bob: Does a devotee lose some of his individuality, in that-
Srila Prabhupada: No, he has full individuality for pleasing Krsna.
Krsna says, "You surrender unto Me." So he voluntarily surrenders. It is
not that he has lost his individuality. He keeps his individuality. Just
like Arjuna--in the beginning, he was declining to fight, on account of
his individuality. But when he accepted Krsna as his spiritual master,
he became sisya [a disciple]. Then whatever Krsna ordered, he said yes.
That doesn't mean he lost his individuality. He voluntarily accepted:
"Whatever Krsna says, I shall do it." Just like all my disciples--they
have not lost their individuality, but they have surrendered their
individuality. That is required. For example, suppose a man does not use
sex. It does not mean he has become impotent. If he likes, he can have
sex life a thousand times. But he has voluntarily avoided it. Param
drstva nivartate: he has a higher taste. Sometimes we fast, but that
does not mean we are diseased. We voluntarily fast. It does not mean
that I am not hungry or cannot eat. But we voluntarily fast.

Bob: Does the devotee who surrenders keep his individual taste?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, in full.

Bob: Taste for different things?

Srila Prabhupada: Hm?

Bob: Does he keep his individual likes and dislikes?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, he keeps everything. But he gives preference to
Krsna. Suppose I like this thing but Krsna says, "No, you cannot use
it." Then I shall not use it. It is for Krsna's sake.
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate

Krsna says positively, "I like these things." So we have to offer
to Krsna what He likes, and then we'll take prasada. Krsna likes
Radharani. Therefore all the gopis, they are trying to push Radharani to
Krsna. "Krsna likes this gopi. All right, push Her." That is Krsna
consciousness. To satisfy the senses of Krsna, not to satisfy my senses.
That is bhakti. That is called prema, love for Krsna. "Ah, Krsna likes
this. I must give Him this."

Bob: There is some prasada [food offered to Krsna]. It's offered, and
then we go and eat, and different prasadams are served. Some I like, and
some I find the taste not at all to my liking.

Srila Prabhupada: You should not do that. The perfection is that
whatever is offered to Krsna you should accept. That is perfection. You
cannot say. "I like this, I don't like this." So long as you make such
discrimination, that means you have not appreciated what prasada is.

A devotee: What if there is someone speaking of likes and dislikes? Say
someone iS preparing some prasada...

Srila Prabhupada: No disliking, no liking. Whatever Krsna likes, that's
all right.

A devotee: Yes. But say someone prepares something,

like some prasada for Krsna, but he does not make it so good, and it isSrila Prabhupada: No, if made sincerely with devotion, then Krsna will
like it. Just like Vidu. Vidu was feeding Krsna bananas, but he was so
absorbed in thought that he was throwing away the real bananas and he
was giving Krsna the skin, and Krsna was eating. [All laugh] Krsna knew
that he was giving in devotion, and Krsna can eat anything, provided
there 1s devotion. It does not matter whether it is materially tasteful
or not. Similarly. a devotee also takes Krsna prasada, whether it is
materially tasteful or not. We should accept everything.

A devotee: But if the devotion is not there, like in India...

Srila Prabhupada: If devotion is not there, He doesn't like any food,
either tasteful or not tasteful. He does not accept it.

A devotee: In India... Somebody-
Srila Prabhupada: Oh, India, India. Don't talk of India! Talk of
philosophy. If there is not devotion, Krsna does not accept anything,
either in India or in your country. Lord Krsna is not obliged to accept
anything costly because it is very tasty. Krsna has very many tasteful
dishes in Vaikuntha. He is not hankering after your food. He accepts
your devotion, bhakti. The real thing is devotion, not the food. Krsna
does not accept any food of this material world. He accepts only the
devotion.

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnaml prayatatmanah

["If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit
or water, I will accept it."] "Because it has been offered to Me with
devotion and love"--that is required. Therefore we do not allow anyone
to cook who is not a devotee. Krsna does not accept anything from the
hands of a nondevotee. Why should He accept? He is not hungry. He does
not require any food. He accepts only the devotion, that's all. That is
the main point. So one has to become a devotee. Not a good cook. But if
he 1s a devotee, then he will be a good cook also. Automatically he will
become a good cook. Therefore one has to become a devotee only. Then all
other good qualifications will automatically be there. And if he is a
nondevotee, any good qualifications have no value. He is on the mental
plane, so he has no good qualification. [There is a long pause in the
conversation. |

Srila Prabhupada: And the time?

Syamasundara: Six o'clock.

Srila Prabhupada: Questions and answers are required. They are
beneficial to all.

Bob: I still have a question on the prasada.

Srila Prabhupada: Suta Gosvami says:

munayah sadhu prsto 'ham

bhavadbhir loka-mangalam

yat krtah krsna-Samprasno
yenatma suprasidati

["O sages, I have been justly questioned by you. Your questions are
worthy because they relate to Lord Krsna and so are relevant to the
world's welfare. Only questions of this sort are capable of completely
Satisfying the self."] Krsna-samprasnah, that is very good. When you
discuss and hear, that is loka-mangalam, auspicious for everyone. Both
the questions and the answers.

Bob: I still do not understand so much about prasada. But if you like
T'll think about it and ask you again tomorrow.

Srila Prabhupada: Prasada is always prasada. But because we are not
elevated sufficiently, therefore we do not like some prasada.

Bob: I found specifically that what I mean--that some are too spicy, and
it hurts my stomach.

Srila Prabhupada: Well... That is also due to not appreciating, but the
cook should have consideration. Krsna must be offered first-class
foodstuffs. So if he offers something last class, he is not performing
his duty. But Krsna can accept anything if it is offered by a devotee,
and a devotee can accept any prasada, even if it 1S spicy. Hiranyakasipu
gave his son poison [and the son offered it to Krsna], and the son drank
it as nectar. So even if it 1S spicy to others, taste, it 1S very
palatable to the devotee. What is the question of spicy? He was offered
poison, real poison. And Putana Raksasi--she also offered Krsna poison.
But Krsna 1S so nice that He thought, "She took Me as My mother," so He
took the poison and delivered her. Krsna does not take the bad side. A
good man does not take the bad side--he takes only the good side. Just
like one of my big Godbrothers--he wanted to make business with my Guru
Maharaja [Spiritual master], but my Guru Maharaja did not take the bad
side. He took the good side. He thought, "He has come forward to give me
some service."

Bob: Business with your--what was that? Business with who?

Srila Prabhupada: I am talking about my Guru Maharaja.

Bob: Oh, I see. I have another question on prasada, if I may. Let us say
some devotee has some trouble and does not eat a certain type of food-like some devotees do not eat ghee because of liver trouble. So these
devotees, should they take all the prasada?

Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Those who are not perfect devotees may
discriminate. But a perfect devotee does not discriminate. Why should
you imitate a perfect devotee? So long as you have discrimination, you
are not a perfect devotee. So why should you artificially imitate a
perfect devotee and eat everything?

Bob: Oh.

Srila Prabhupada: The point is, a perfect devotee does not make any
discrimination. Whatever is offered to Krsna is nectar. That's all.
Krsna accepts anything from a devotee. "Whatever is offered to Me by My
devotee," He accepts. The same thing for a devotee. Don't you see the
point? A perfect devotee does not make any discrimination. But if I am
not a perfect devotee and I have discrimination, why shall I imitate the
perfect devotee? It may not be possible for me to digest everything
because I am not a perfect devotee. A devotee should not be a foolish
man. It is said:

krsna ye bhaje se bada catura

So a devotee knows his position, and he is intelligent enough to
deal with others accordingly.

Chapter Seven

Acting in Knowledge of Krsna

An Indian gentleman: By what kind of actions does one earn good karma?
Srila Prabhupada: Good karma means what is prescribed in the Vedas.
Specifically, it 1s prescribed that one should perform yajna. Yajna
means actions for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. So good karma means performance of the yajnas as
they are prescribed in the Vedic literatures. And the purpose of this
yajna is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. A good, law-abiding citizen is one
whose actions satisfy the government. So, good karma is to satisfy Lord
Visnu, the Supreme Lord. Unfortunately, modern civilization does not
know what the Supreme Personality of Godhead is, what to speak of
Satisfying Him. people do not know. They are simply busy with material
activities. Therefore all of them are performing only bad karma and
therefore suffering. They are blind men leading other blind men. And
both are then suffering by bad karma. That is very easy to understand.
If you do something criminal, you will suffer. If you do something
benevolent for the state, for the people, then you are recognized; you
are sometimes given a title. This is good and bad karma. So, good karma
means you enjoy some material happiness; bad karma means you suffer from
material distress. By good karma you get birth in a good family; you get
riches, good money. Then you become a learned scholar; you become
beautiful also.

[Some time passes. ]

Bob: What about the person who--who is not very aware of God, but...
Srila Prabhupada: Then he is an animal. The animal does not know what is
good. A person who does not know what is God, or one who does not try to
understand what is God--he is an animal. The animals are with four legs,
and that animal is with two legs. And Darwin's theory is they are
monkeys. So anyone who does not know God, or does not try to understand
God, 1s nothing but an animal.

Bob: What about the innocent people?

Srila Prabhupada: The animal is very innocent. If you cut its throat, it
won't protest. So innocence is not a very good qualification. The
animals are all innocent. Therefore you get the chance to cut their
throats. So to become innocent is not a very good qualification. Our
proposition is that one must be very, very intelligent, and then he can
understand Krsna. To become an innocent, ignorant simpleton is not a
very good qualification. Simplicity is all right, but one should not be

unintelligent.
Bob: Can you tell me again what intelligence is?
Srila Prabhupada: Intelligence means... One who knows what he is, what

1s this world, what is God, what are the interrelations-—-he is
intelligent. The animal does not know what he is. He thinks that he is
the body. Similarly, anyone who does not know what he is, he is not
intelligent.

Bob: What about a person who does--tries to do--what is right and is
very conscientious instead of being unconscious about the things he
does? Like the servant who is very honest to his master but knows that
if he were not honest he would not be caught. If he stays honest
anyway... a person like that? Is that some kind of good karma?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, to become honest is also good karma. How to
become a good man is described in the Bhagavad-gita very elaborately.

daivi sampad vimoksaya
nibandhayasuri mata

So 1£f you become qualified with the daivi sampad (transcendental
qualities), then, vimoksaya--you will be liberated. And, nibandhayasuri-if you are gualified with the demoniac qualifications, then you will be
more and more entangled. Unfortunately the modern civilization does not
know what is liberation and what is entanglement. They are so much
ignorant; they do not know. Suppose if I ask you what you mean by
liberation, can you answer? [No answer.] And if I ask you what you mean
by entanglement, can you answer? [Again no answer.] These words are
there in the Vedic literature--liberation and entanglement--but, at the
present moment, people do not even know what is liberation and what is
entanglement. They are so ignorant and foolish, and still they are proud
of their advancement in knowledge. Can you answer what is liberation?
You are a professor, teacher, but if I ask you, can you explain what is
liberation?

Bob: Not adequately because if I could explain, then I would become
liberated very fast.

Srila Prabhupada: But if you do not know what is liberation, then how
fast or slow liberation? [Everyone laughs.] There is no question of
liberation. It is neither fast nor slow. You should first know what is
liberation. If you do not know where the train is going, then what is
the use of asking, understanding, whether it 1s going fast or slow? You
do not know your destination. What is liberation?

Bob: Umm...

Srila Prabhupada: I am asking. You daily ask me. I am asking you.
Bob: [Laughs.] Ah--okay... I'll think for a moment.

Srila Prabhupada: Liberation is described in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. The
exact Sanskrit word for liberation is mukti. So that is defined in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam.

muktir hitvanyatha rupam
Svarupena vyavasthitih

One should stop doing all nonsense, and he must be situated in his
Original position. But this is also more embarrassing because nobody
knows his original position and how to act properly. Because people are
generally acting differently, because they do not know what is proper-the modern population is so much ignorant about their life--it is a very
awkward position. They do not know.

Bob: Can you tell me who is honest?

Srila Prabhupada: If one does not know what is honesty, how can he be
honest? But if you know what is honesty, then you can be honest. What is
honesty? First of all explain.

Bob: Aaah, ummm--Honesty is doing what you really feel is right.

Srila Prabhupada: A thief is feeling, "I must steal to provide for my
children. It is right." Does it mean that he is honest? Everyone thinks-The butcher thinks, "It is my life. I must cut the throat of the
animals daily." Just like that--what is that hunter? And Narada Muni met
him?

Syamasundara: Mrgari.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, Mrgari. Narada asked him, "Why are you killing in
this way?" And he said, "Oh, it is my business. My father taught it." So
he was honestly doing that. So a feeling of honesty depends on culture.
A thiefs culture is different. He thinks stealing is honest.

Bob: So what is honesty?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is my question. [Everyone laughs.] Real
honesty is that you should not encroach upon another's property. This is
honesty. For instance, this is my table. If you want to take it away
while going, is that honesty? So therefore the simple definition of
honesty is that you should not encroach upon another's rights. That is
honesty.

Bob: So somebody who is honest would be in the mode of goodness? Would
that be correct?

Srila Prabhupada: Certainly, certainly. Because the mode of goodness
means knowledge. So if you know, "This table does not belong to me; it
belongs to Svamiji," you will not try to take it away. Therefore, one
must know--be thoroughly well conversant--then he can be honest.

Bob: So, now you have said the mode of goodness was knowledge of God,
but somebody may be honest without having very much knowledge of God.
Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m?

Bob: Without--without being honest--without thinking they are honest
because it is God's wishes--they just feel like they ought to be honest.
Srila Prabhupada: Mmm. God wishes everyone to be honest. Why should God
think otherwise?

Bob: So... so you may follow God's wishes without knowing you are
following God's wishes? Like somebody may be in the mode...

Srila Prabhupada: No, following without knowing--that is absurd. You
must know the order of God. And if you follow that, then that is
honesty.
Bob: But somebody would not be honest without knowing God?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because God is the supreme proprietor, the
Supreme enjoyer, and He is the supreme friend. That is the statement of
the Bhagavad-gita. If anyone knows these three things, then he is in
full knowledge. These three things only: that God is the proprietor of
everything, God is friend of everyone, and God is the enjoyer of
everything. For example, everyone knows that in the body, the stomach is
the enjoyer. Not the hands, legs, eyes, ears. These are there simply to
help the stomach. Eyes--the vulture goes seven miles up to see where
there 1s food for the stomach. Is it not?

Bob: That 1s so.

Srila Prabhupada: Then the wings fly there, and the Jaws catch the food.
Similarly, as in this body the stomach is the enjoyer, the central
figure of the whole cosmic manifestation, material or spiritual, 1s
Krsna, God. He is the enjoyer. We can understand this just by
considering our own bodies. The body is also a creation. The body has
the same mechanical nature you will find in the whole universe. The same
mechanical arrangement will be found anywhere you go, even in animals.
In the human body or in the cosmic manifestation--almost the same
mechanism. So you can understand very easily that in this body--any
body, your body--the stomach is the enjoyer. There is a central enjoyer.
And the stomach is the friend also. Because if you cannot digest food,
you see, then all other limbs of the body become weak. Therefore the
Stomach is the friend. It is digesting and distributing the energy to
all the limbs of the body. Is it not?

Bob: It 18S So.

Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, the central stomach of the whole creation
is God, or Krsna. He is the enjoyer, He is the friend, and, as the
Supreme proprietor, He is maintaining everyone. Just as a king can
maintain the whole country's citizens because he is the proprietor.
Without being the proprietor, how can one become everyone's friend? So
these things have to be understood. Krsna is the enjoyer, Krsna is the
proprietor, and Krsna is the friend. If you know these three things,
then your knowledge is full; you do not require to understand anything
more.

yasmin vijnate sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati

If you simply understand Krsna by these three formulas, then your
knowledge is complete. You don't require any more knowledge. But people
will not agree. "Why should Krsna be the proprietor? Hitler should be
the proprietor. Nixon ..." That iS going on. Therefore you are in
trouble. But if you understand these three things only, then your
knowledge is complete. But you will not accept--you will put forward so
many impediments to understanding these three things, and that is the
cause of our trouble. But in the Bhagavad-gita it is plainly said:

bhoktaram yajna-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram.
suhrdam sarva-bhutanam

jJnatva mam santim rcchati

["The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices
and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the
pangs of material miseries."] But we won't take this. We shall put
forward so many false proprietors, false friends, false enjoyers, and
they will fight one another. This is the situation of the world. If
education is given and people take this knowledge, there is immediately
peace (Santim rcchati). This is knowledge, and if anyone follows this
principle, he is honest. He does not claim, "It 1s mine." He Knows
everything: "Oh, it is Krsna's, so therefore everything should be
utilized for Krsna's service." That is honesty. If this pencil belongs
to me, the etiquette is--My students sometimes ask, "Can I use this
pencil?" "Yes, you can." Similarly, if I know that everything belongs to
Krsna, I will not use anything without His permission. That is honesty.
And that is knowledge. One who does not know is ignorant; he is foolish.
And a foolish man commits criminality. All criminals are foolish men.
Out of ignorance one commits lawbreaking. So ignorance is not bliss, but
it is folly to be wise where ignorance is bliss. That is the difficulty.
The whole world is enjoying ignorance. And when you talk about Krsna
consciousness, they do not very much appreciate it. If I say, "Krsna is
the proprietor; you are not the proprietor," you will not be very much
Satisfied. [They laugh.] Just see--ignorance is bliss. So it is my
foolishness to say the real truth. Therefore it is folly to be wise
where ignorance is bliss. So we are taking the risk of offending

people, and they will think we are fools. If I say to a rich man, "You
are not the proprietor. Krsna is the proprietor, so whatever money you
have, spend it for Krsna," he will be angry.

upadeso hi murkhanam
prakepaya na santaye

"Tf you instruct a rascal, he'll be angry." Therefore we go as
beggars: "My dear sir, you are a very nice man. I am a sannyasSi beggar,
so I want to construct a temple. Can you spare some money?" So he will
think, "Oh, here 1s a beggar. Give him some money." [They laugh] But if
I say, “Dear sir, you have millions of dollars at your disposal. That is
Krsna's money. Give it to me. I am Krsna's servant." Oh, he'll...
[Everyone laughs.] He will not be very satisfied. Rather, if I go as a
beggar, he will give me something. And if I tell him the truth, he will
not give me a farthing. [They laugh] We convince him as beggars. We are

not beggars. We are Krsna's servants. We don't want anything from
anyone. Because we know Krsna will provide everything.

Bob: Oh-h...

Srila Prabhupada: This is knowledge. For instance, a child will
sometimes take something important, so we have to flatter him. "Oh, you
are so nice. Please take these lozenges and give me that paper. It is
nothing; it is paper." And he will say, "Oh, yes. Take. That's nice."
Two-paise lozenges--very nice and sweet. So we have to do that. Why?
Because a man will go to hell by taking Krsna's money. So some way or
other, take some money from him and engage him in the Krsna
consciousness movement.

Bob: And then he may not go to hell?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. You save him from going to hell.

needs it. Who is not poor? There are so many gentlemen sitting here. Who
1s not in need of money and food? You are also in need of money. So how
do you distinguish poor from rich? Everyone needs it. If that is your
definition... If one needs money and food, then everyone needs money and
food. So everyone iS poor.

Bob: So, but, well--I was thinking in terms of just people who are
relatively poor.

Srila Prabhupada: Relatively, relatively, maybe. You are more hungry
than me. That does not mean you are not hungry or I am not hungry. I do
not feel hungry now. That does not mean I do not feel hungry or I am not
hungry. For the time being you may not be hungry. But tomorrow you'll be
hungry.

Bob: What I feel is that--somehow these people--that... Everybody around
them may be stealing, but they still stand up and don't steal. These
people somehow deserve something good to happen to them.

Srila Prabhupada: But the man who is thinking that he is not stealing is
also a thief because he does not know that everything belongs to Krsna.
Therefore, whatever he is accepting, he is stealing.

Bob: Is he less of a thief?

Srila Prabhupada: You may not know that I am the proprietor of this
wrapper, but if you take it away, are you not stealing?

Bob: But maybe if I know it is yours and I take it, I am a worse thief
than if I do not know whose it is. I just think it may be nobody's, and
I take it.

Srila Prabhupada: That is also stealing. Because it must belong to
somebody. And you take it without his permission. You may not know
exactly who is the proprietor, but you know, "It must belong to
someone." That is knowledge. Sometimes we see on the road so many
valuable things left there--government property for repairing roads or
some electrical work. A man may think, "Oh, fortunately these things are
lying here, so I may take them." Is it not stealing?

Bob: It is stealing.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. He does not know that this is all government
property. He takes it away. That is stealing. And when he is caught, he
1s arrested, and he is punished. So, similarly, whatever you are
collecting--suppose you are drinking a glass of water from the river. Is
the river your property?

Bob: No.

Srila Prabhupada: Then? It is stealing. You have not created the river.
You do not know who is the proprietor. Therefore it 1s not your
property. So, even if you drink a glass of water without knowing to whom
it belongs, you are a thief. So you may think, "I am honest," but
actually you are a thief. You must remember Krsna. "Oh, Krsna, it 18s
Your creation, so kindly allow me to drink." This is honesty. Therefore
a devotee always thinks of Krsna. In all activities: "Oh, it is
Krsna's." This is honesty. So without Krsna consciousness, everyone is a
rascal, is a thief, 1S a rogue, is a robber. These qualifications.
Therefore our conclusion is that anyone who does not understand Krsna
has no good qualifications. Neither is he honest, nor has he knowledge.
Therefore he is a third-class man. Is that correct? What do you think,
Giriraja?

Giriraja: [a disciple]: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: This is not dogmatism. This is a fact. [Some time
elepses.] So, you have understood what is knowledge and what is honesty?

Bob: I--in a way. In a way.
Srila Prabhupada: And is there another way? [Bob laughs.] Is there any
other way? Defy it! [Bob laughs again. Srila Prabhupada also laughs. |]
Another way? Giriraja?

Giriraja: No.

Srila Prabhupada: Is there an alternative? We do not say anything that
can be defied by anyone. That experience we have. Rather, we defy
everyone: "Any questions?" Till now, Krsna has given us protection. In
big, big meetings in big, big countries, after speaking I ask, "Any
questions?"

Bob: Now, I have none.

Srila Prabhupada: In London, we had--how many days, lectures in that-what is that? Conway Hall?

A devotee: Twelve days. Conway Hall.

Srila Prabhupada: Conway Hall.

A devotee: Twelve days.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So after every meeting I was asking, "Any
questions?"

Bob: Did you get many questions?

Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. Many foolish questions. [Everyone laughs. ]
Bob: Let me ask one more question. What is being foolish?

Srila Prabhupada: One having no knowledge is to be considered foolish.
An Indian gentleman: Prabhupada, I have one personal question. Can I
ask?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Indian gentleman: Some time ago in Calcutta they observed a week--it was
named, "Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Week."

Srila Prabhupada: Mmm. [He gives a quick laugh] This is another
foolishness. They are advertising prevention of cruelty, and they are
maintaining thousands of slaughterhouses. You see? That is another
foolishness.

Indian gentleman: So I wanted just to ask-
Srila Prabhupada: Asking--before you ask, I give you the answer. [All
laugh] That is another foolishness. They are regularly cruel to animals,
and they are making a society...

Bob: Maybe this is-
Srila Prabhupada: Suppose a gang of thieves has a signboard--"Goodman
and Company." You sometimes find such a signboard.

Syamasundara: Our landlord in the San Francisco temple was named
Goodman.

Srila Prabhupada: The philosophy is that when an animal is not properly
nourished, that is cruelty. Therefore instead of allowing it to starve,
better to kill it. That is their theory. Is it not?

Bob: Yes.
Srila Prabhupada: They say, "Oh, it is better to kill him than to give
him so much pain." That theory 1S coming in communist countries. An old

man--grandfather--is suffering, so better to kill him. And there--in
Africa there is a class of men who make a festival by killing their
great-grandfathers. Is it not? Yes.

Syamasundara: They eat them?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. [Syamasundara laughs.] Yes?

A devotee: I had an uncle and aunt. They were in the Army. So when they
went overseas, they could not take their dog with them. So they said,
"The poor dog. He will be so heartbroken not to be with us," so they put
him to sleep--killed him.
Srila Prabhupada: In Gandhi's life also, he once killed one calf or some
cow. It was suffering very much. So Gandhi ordered, “Instead of letting
it suffer, just kill it."

Giriraja: Yesterday you said that the spiritual master may have to
suffer due to the sinful activities of his disciples. What do you mean
by sinful activities?

Srila Prabhupada: Sinful activities means that you promised, "I shall
follow the regulative principles." If you do not follow, that is sinful.
That 1s the promise. Very simple. You break the promise and do nasty
things; therefore you are sinful. Is it not?

Giriraja: Yes. [pause] But there are some things that we're instructed
to do...

Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m?

Giriraja: There are other things which we're instructed to do which,
even though we try to do, we cannot do perfectly yet.

Srila Prabhupada: How is that? You try to do and cannot do? How is that?
Giriraja: Like chanting attentively. Sometimes we try to, but-
Srila Prabhupada: Well, that is not a fault. Suppose you are trying to
do something. Due to your inexperience if you sometimes fail, that is
not a fault. You are trying. There is a verse in the Bhagavatam--hm-m-that if a devotee is trying his best but due to his incapability he
sometimes fails, Krsna excuses him. And in the Bhagavad-gita also it is
Said:

api cet suduracaro
bhajyate mam ananya-bhak

Sometimes not willingly but due to past bad habits--habit is second
nature--one does something nonsensical. But that does not mean he is
faulty. But he must repent for that--"I have done this." And he should
try to avoid it as far as possible. But habit is second nature.
Sometimes, in spite of your trying hard, maya is so strong that it
pushes with Pitfalls. That can be excused. Krsna excuses. But those who
are doing something willingly are not excused. On the strength that I am
a devotee, if I think, "Because I am chanting, I may therefore commit
all this nonsense, and it will be nullified," that is the greatest
offense.

Chapter Eight

Advancing in Krsna Consciousness

Springfield, New Jersey
Dear Prabhupada,

I offer my humble obeisances.

I have been associating with the devotees of the New York temple.
With the association of such fine, advanced devotees, I hope that I may
make some advancement in Krsna consciousness. My fiancee has started to
come to the temple and is chanting a little. She knew nothing about
Krsna consciousness until I wrote her about it from India. Atreya RS1i
has been kind enough to invite us to his home so that we may see an
ideal householder life.
I went to Bombay the end of April for termination from the Peace
Corps. I was fortunate enough to come down with a minor illness, so that
I had to stay in Bombay for two weeks. I spent the time with the
advanced and kind devotees at Juhu. Unfortunately you had left five days
previously.

IT understand so little, but I have faith in the process of Krsna
consciousness and hope to take to it more and more.

I look forward to Atreya Rsi's description of the temple in Los
Angeles and hope that I may personally hear you in New York.

Thank you for the kindness you have shown to a very undeserving
boy.

Sincerely,
Bob Cohen

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
ISKCON Los Angeles

Bob Cohen
Springfield, New Jersey
My dear Bob,

Please accept my blessings. I thank you very much for your letter
dated June 12, 1972. I have noted the sentiments expressed therein with
great pleasure. I am very glad to hear that you are associating with us.
I know that you are a very good boy, very intelligent, and your behavior
is gentle, so I have all confidence that very quickly Krsna will bestow
all His blessings upon you, and you will feel yourself becoming
perfectly happy in Krsna consciousness. One makes his advancement in
Krsna consciousness by voluntarily giving up his attachment to material
nature, or maya. Such renunciation is called tapasya. But we are not
very willing to perform austerities without good reason; therefore any
man with a good scientific and philosophical mind, like your good self,
must first appreciate what transcendental knowledge is. If you get
knowledge, automatically tapasya will follow, and then you make your
advancement in spiritual life. So to get knowledge is the first item for
anyone who is hoping to find the perfection of his life. Therefore I
advise you to read our books daily as far as possible and try to
understand the subject matter from different angles of vision by
discussing it frequently with the devotees at the New York temple. In
this way you will gradually become convinced, and by your sincere
attitude and devotional service you will make progress.

Yes, having some faith in me and in this Krsna consciousness
process is the first and only requirement for getting actual wisdom. If
there is faith, understanding will follow. And as your understanding
increases, so will your disgust with the spell of illusory energy. And
when you voluntarily give up your entanglements in the material world,
then the progress is assured.

I think we are just now typing up the tapes of those conversations
we held in Mayapur, and we shall be publishing them as a book. It will
be called Perfect Questions, Perfect Answers. I shall send you a copy as
soon as they are ready to distribute. Meanwhile, I shall be stopping in
New York for two or three days on my way to London for the Ratha-yatra
Festival there. I am not yet certain when I shall be arriving in New
York, but it will be some time in the early part of July. You may keep
in regular contact with Bali Mardana regarding the arrival date, and I
Shall be very much engladdened to meet with you in New York once again.
Again we shall discuss if you have any questions.
Hoping this will meet you in good health and a happy mood,
Your ever well-wisher,
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

Chapter Nine

Deciding for the Future

Bob: I received your very kind letter.

Srila Prabhupada: Oh.

Bob: About a week ago.

Srila Prabhupada: Now, you are a very intelligent boy. You can try to
understand this philosophy. It 1S very important. For sense
gratification people are wasting so much energy. They are not aware of
what 1S going to happen in the next life. There is a next life, but
foolish people are ignorant. This life is preparation for the next life.
That they do not know. The modern education and itS universities are
completely in darkness about this simple knowledge. We are changing
bodies every moment--that is a medical fact. After leaving this body, we
will have to accept another body. How are we going to accept that body?
What kind of body? This can also be known. For example, if someone is
being educated, one can understand that when he passes his examination,
he 1S going to be an engineer or medical practitioner. Similarly, in
this life, you can prepare yourself to become something in the next
life. Barbara: [Bob's wife] Can we decide what we want to be next life?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you can decide. We have decided that next life we
are going to Krsna. This is our decision--back home, back to Godhead.
Suppose you want to become educated. After this decision that you are
going to be an engineer or you are going to be a medical practitioner,
with that objective you prepare and educate yourself. Similarly, you can
decide what you are going to do next life. But if you don't decide, then
the material nature will decide.

Barbara: Could I have been Krsna conscious in my last life?

Srila Prabhupada: It doesn't matter. But you can become. Take advantage
of our Krsna consciousness movement.

A devotee: She's asking if it was possible that in her last life she was
a Krsna devotee and has come back again.

Srila Prabhupada: When one is perfectly Krsna's devotee, he does not
come back. But if there is a little deficiency, then there is a
possibility of coming back. But even though there is a deficiency, he
comes back to a nice family. Sucinam srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto
'bhijayate. ["The unsuccessful yogi takes birth in a religious or
aristocratic family."] Human intelligence can decide for the future.
That 1S human intelligence. The animal cannot decide. We have
discriminatory power. If I do this, I will be benefited; if I do that, I
will not be benefited. This is there in human life. So you have to use
it properly. You should know what is our goal of life and decide in that
way. That 1S human civilization....

Barbara: Have you ever seen Krsna?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Barbara: You have?

Srila Prabhupada: Daily. Every moment.

Barbara: But not in the material body?

Srila Prabhupada: He has no material body.

Barbara: Well, in the temple here they have pictures of Krsna....

Srila Prabhupada: That is not a material body. You are seeing materially
because you have material eyes. Because you have material eyes, you
Cannot see the spiritual form. Therefore He kindly appears to be ina
material body so that you can see. However, because He has kindly made
Himself just fit for your seeing, that does not mean He has a material
body. Suppose the President of the United States kindly comes to your
house. That does not mean that his position and your position are the
same. It is his kindness. Out of love, he may come to your house, but
that does not mean he is on the same level as you. Similarly, because we
cannot see Krsna with our present eyes, Krsna therefore appears before
uS aS a painting, as made of stone, as made of wood. And Krsna is not
different from these paintings and wood because everything is Krsna.
Barbara: After we die, what happens to our spirit?

Srila Prabhupada: You get another body.

Barbara: Immediately?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Just as when you change your apartment: you fix
up your new apartment first; then you leave this one and go there.
Barbara: So do we know what type of body we will get?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, provided you are qualified. Otherwise nature will
arrange for it. Those who know--they know what is there. But for those
who do not know, nature will arrange things. If you do not know, this
means you have not prepared your life, so accidentally, at the time of
death, your mentality will create another body, and nature will supply
it.

Barbara: And chanting--what does chanting do?

Srila Prabhupada: That you can ask these boys [the devotees]. They will
explain.

Bob: If Krsna controls everything, how does Krsna control a nondevotee?
Srila Prabhupada: By maya. Just as the government controls everything. A
kingdom is controlled by the king's departments.

Bob: And how does Krsna control a devotee?

Srila Prabhupada: Just as you control your beloved. For example, if you
have a beloved child, you control him for his benefit. If he is going to
touch fire, you will immediately tell him, "No, no, my dear child. Don't
touch it." So a Krsna conscious person, a devotee, is never misled,
because Krsna is always guiding him, whereas those who are not Krsna
conscious are in the charge of maya, and maya will do the needful, as
you have seen.

Bob: Is it preset, when we're born, the time that we'll die?

Srila Prabhupada: What?

Bob: Is the time that I'm going to die, and others are going to die,
preset before we are born? When I'm born, do I have a certain given life
span?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

A devotee: And he cannot change that?

Srila Prabhupada: No, he cannot change it, but Krsna can change it.
Devotee: If he commits suicide, is that also preset?
Srila Prabhupada: Not preset. That you can do because you have a little
independence. It is not natural to commit suicide; it 1S unnatural. So
because we have independence, we can go from nature to "un-nature." A
prisoner cannot go out of the prison house naturally, but somehow or
other he arranges to jump over the wall and goes away. Then he becomes a
criminal for further imprisonment. Naturally, the prisoner cannot go out
of the prison house, but if somehow or other he manages to escape, that
means he becomes again a criminal. He will be arrested again, and his
term of imprisonment will be increased, or he will be punished more. So,
naturally we cannot violate destiny. But if we do it, then we will
suffer. But our destiny can be changed by Krsna when we are Krsna
conscious. We do not do it, but Krsna will do it. Krsna says: aham tvam
Sarva-papebhyo mok-sayisyami: "I shall give you protection." That change
takes place for my protection.

There are two stages--nondevotee and devotee. The nondevotee is
under the control of material nature, and the devotee is under the
direct control of Krsna. In the office of a big man, an executive of a
big company, there are many employees, and they are controlled by
different departmental superintendents. But although outside of home he
controls indirectly, the same man at home is controlling his children
directly. But he is always a controller. Similarly, God is the
controller always. When one becomes a devotee, he 1s controlled by God;
when he is a nondevotee, he is controlled by His agent, maya. But he has
to be controlled. For example, every citizen of America is controlled by
the government. When he is all right, the civil department controls him;
when he is not all right, the criminal department controls him. But he
cannot say, "I am not controlled." That is not possible. Everyone is
controlled. If somebody says, "I am not controlled," he is not sane; he
1S crazy. Everyone is controlled. So either you are controlled directly
by God, or you are controlled by His agency, maya. Being controlled by
maya, you spoil your life; you remain in material existence one birth
after another, changing your bodies. But if you choose to be controlled
by God, then after this body, you go back home, back to Godhead. Then
your life is successful. You cannot exist without being controlled; that
is not possible. That is intelligence. And that is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita. Bahunam janmanam antejJnanavan mam prapadyate: "After many
births of traveling or speculation, one surrenders unto Me." Vasudevah
Sarvam iti: "Krsna, You are everything. So I have come. Accept me. I am
now fully surrendered unto You, and You control me. I am controlled. For
so long I have been controlled by these rascals. There is no benefit. I
have been controlled by my senses. So under the control of the senses I
have served so-called family, society, country, nation--up to serving
the dogs. But nothing has given me satisfaction. Therefore now I have
good sense; I put myself under Your control. Instead of being controlled
by dog, let me be controlled by God." This is Krsna consciousness. Have
you not seen how a man is controlled by a dog? In the street the dog
stops, passes stool, and his master will stand and wait. IS it not? He
1S passing stool and urine, and the master is thinking, "I am master."
But he is being controlled. That is maya. He has become servant of the
dog, but he is thinking, "I am master." So unless one is Krsna
conscious, one cannot understand. We can understand that this rascal is
being controlled by his dog, but he is thinking that he is the master.
We can understand. What do you think? Has he not become controlled by
the dog?
Bob: That 1s so.

Srila Prabhupada: But he is thinking, "I am the master of the dog." A
family man is controlled by his wife, his children, by his servants, by
everyone, but he is thinking, "I am master." President Nixon is thinking
that he is master of his country, but he is controlled. At once he can
be dismissed by the public, his servants! And he will take a position,
claiming, "I will give you very good service," and "I shall be a firstclass servant." Therefore people vote, "All right, you become
president." And he is advertising: "Reelect me! Reelect me!" That means
he is a servant. But he is thinking, "I am master." That is the
position. Maya. One who is controlled by maya is thinking himself
master, but he is a servant. And a devotee never thinks to himself, "I
am master," only "I am servant." That is the difference between maya and
reality. He at least knows: "I am never master. I am always a servant."
When a servant is thinking, "I am master," that is called illusion. But
when a servant thinks, "I ama servant," that is not illusion. That is
mukti, liberation. Because he is not controlled by false thoughts. Try
to think about this subject matter. A devotee is never controlled by
false thoughts. He knows his position. Svarupena vyavasthitih. Mukti,
liberation, means to be situated in one's own constitutional position. I
am a servant. So if I know that I am a servant, that 1s my liberation.
And if I think that I am master, that is bondage. This is the difference
between conditioned life and liberated life.

So these Krsna conscious devotees are always thinking that they are
servants of Krsna. Therefore they are all liberated. They do not
endeavor for liberation. They are already liberated because they are
Situated in their constitutional position. They are not artificially
thinking, "I am master." Otherwise, everyone is thinking, "I am master."
That is illusion. You cannot be master in any state of your life; you
must remain a servant. That 1S your position. When one thinks
artificially that he is master, that is his conditioned life. And when
one voluntarily surrenders to the supreme master, that is his
liberation. A devotee does not try for liberation separately. AS soon as
he surrenders to Krsna or Krsna's representative, he is liberated.

Bob: Prabhupada, people that engage in religions, like these "Jesus
freaks" and other people, claim that Jesus is guiding them. Can this be
SO?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but they are not taking the guidance. Just like
the Christians. Jesus is guiding them, "Thou shalt not kill," but they
are killing. Where is the Jesus guidance? Simply saying, "I am guided by
Jesus Christ"--will that do? "But I don't care for his words." Is that
guidance? Nobody is being guided by Jesus Christ. Their claim is false.
It is very hard to find a man who is actually being guided by Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ's guidance is available, but nobody is caring for
him. They have taken Jesus Christ as contractor to take up their sins.
That is their philosophy. They commit all kinds of sins, and poor Jesus
Christ will be responsible. That is their religion. Therefore they say,
"We have a very good religion. For all our sinful activities, Jesus
Christ will die." So is that good religion? They have no sympathy for
Jesus Christ. He died for our sins. Why should we commit sins again?
Such a great life has been sacrificed for our sins, so we should be
guided by Jesus Christ. But if you take it otherwise--"Ah, we shall go
on committing all sins, and Jesus Christ will make a contract to nullify
all my sins; I'll simply go to the church and confess and come back and
again do all nonsense"--do you think that shows very good intelligence?
Bob: No.

Srila Prabhupada: Actually, one who is guided by Jesus Christ will
certainly get liberation. But it is very hard to find a man who is
actually being guided by Jesus Christ.

Bob: What about the "Jesus freaks," the young people that have joined
the Jesus movement? They read the Bible very often, and they try to-Srila Prabhupada: But violence is against the Bible's injunctions. How
can they kill if they are following the Bible?

Bob: I asked one this, and he claimed that Jesus was also eating meat in
the Bible.

Srila Prabhupada: That's all right. He may eat anything. He is powerful.
But he has ordered, "Thou shalt not kill. You must stop killing." He is
powerful. He can eat the whole world. But you cannot compare to Jesus
Christ. You cannot imitate Jesus Christ; you have to abide by his order.
Then you are guided by Jesus Christ. That is actually obedience. That is
explained in the Bhagavata. One who 1S isvara, who iS empowered, can do
anything, but we cannot imitate. We have to abide by his order: "What he
Says to me, that I will do." You cannot imitate. You say that Jesus
Christ ate meat. Admitting that, you do not know in what condition he
ate meat. He is himself eating meat, but he is advising others not to
kill. Do you think that Jesus Christ was contradicting himself?

Bob: No.

Srila Prabhupada: He cannot do that. That is real faith in him--that he
cannot do that. So why has he eaten meat? He knows, but he has asked me
not to kill. I have to follow. That is the real system. You are not
Jesus Christ; you cannot imitate him. He has sacrificed his life for
God. Can you

do that? So why shall you imitate Jesus Christ? You are imitating Jesus
Christ by eating meat. Why not imitate Jesus Christ and sacrifice your
life for spreading God consciousness? What do you think? Yes, when you
preach you can say what you think. They are so-called Christians--but
what are they doing for God? Just consider the sun. The sun is absorbing
urine. Can you drink urine? If you want to imitate the sun--"Oh, here is
the sun absorbing urine. Let me drink urine"--can you? Jesus Christ is
powerful; he can do everything. But we cannot imitate; we have to simply
abide by his order. That is real Christianity. We cannot imitate a
powerful man. That is wrong. In our Vedic literature, there was a poison
ocean, so people could not find out what to do with it. Then Lord Siva
said, "All right, I'll drink it." So he drank the whole poison ocean and
kept it in his throat. Can you drink poison? Not the ocean--just one
cup? So how can we imitate Lord Siva? Lord Siva never advised that we
drink poison. So you have to abide by the advice, not imitate. These LSD
and marijuana people say that Lord Siva used to smoke ganja. But Lord
Siva drank the whole poisoned ocean. Can you do that? Lord Siva's
instructions should be taken. He says that the best worship is worship
of Visnu. Visnor aradhanam param. When he was asked by Parvati what
method of worship is best, then he said, "The best worship is worship of
Lord Visnu [Krsna]." There are many demigods, but he recommended Visnu
worship as the best. And better than Visnu worship 1s worship of a
Vaisnava. Tadiyanam--His servants, or those who are in relation to Him.
For instance, we are worshiping this plant, tulasi. We are not
worshiping all plants, but because this tulasi has a very intimate
connection with Krsna, Visnu, we are therefore worshiping her.
Similarly, if anything is intimately related with Krsna, worship of that
thing is better than worship of Visnu.

Bob: Why is that?

Srila Prabhupada: Because Krsna will be pleased. Suppose you have a dog

and some friends come and pat your dog. [Srila Prabhupada makes big
patting motions.] You become pleased. You become pleased: "Oh, he is my
good friend." You see how they think. We see this--some friend comes and
says, "My, what a nice dog you have." [Laughter.] [Some Indian guests

enter the room. |]

Srila Prabhupada: Please have some prasada.

[Srila Prabhupada continues speaking with his guests, sometimes in
English and sometimes Hindi. It is his last day in New York, and his
plane to London is scheduled to leave in only afew hours, Bob has
brought a car to drive Srila Prabhupada to Kennedy Airport. The davotees
are scurying about, bringing luggage to the car, putting the manuscripts
of Srila Prabhupada's latest translating work in ordar, and making other
last-minute arrangements. ]

Syamasundara: Everything's ready, Srila Prabhupada. The car is waiting
for us.

Srila Prabhupada: So? We can go now? All right. Hare Krsna!

Concluding words

On July 19, 1976, His Divine Grace Srila Prabhupada accepted my
wife and me as his disciples and initiated us with the names Bhakti-devi
dasi and Brahmatirtha dasa. As I reflect back on that day, I can see how
fortunate I was to have met His Divine Grace and my Godbrothers in the
Hare Krsna movement.

When I was handed my beads at initiation, I promised to follow the
regulative principles and to chant God's names daily. Four years
previously, Srila Prabhupada had advised me to follow these principles,
and within six months, he said, I could be like the other devotees; all
unnecessary things (anarthas), such as mundane movies and restaurants,
would cease to attract me. "The whole human life is meant for
purification," he said. I was interested in being purified, even though
I did not really know what purification meant. I had gone to India with
the Peace Corps hoping to find a higher level of consciousness. I could
not believe that satisfying the senses was the all in all, yet I myself
was bound by the senses. Later I could understand that yoga means
becoming free from the dictation of the senses.

Upon returning to America, I started graduate school in geology,
got married, and became somewhat entangled in domestic responsibilities,
but I would very often think of my conversations with Srila Prabhupada
and of his instructions. One of his primary instructions was simply to
associate with the devotees, and this I gladly did. Devotees are
different: by understanding that loving service to the Supreme Lord is
the goal of life, they avoid getting caught up in the petty affairs of
sense gratification and false ego. Visiting the temple was most
refreshing. Gradually, my wife and I became friends with many devotees
and wanted somehow to do some service for the movement. I sponsored a
bhakti-yoga club at the university, and our apartment served as a way
Station for traveling parties of devotees.
As we followed Srila Prabhupada's instructions, even our eating
became purified. In India I had told Srila Prabhupada that I could not
offer my food as the devotees do because I did not understand that Krsna
is God. So he told me simply to thank God for my food before eating.
This we did, and finally our devotion matured, and we started actually
offering our food to the Supreme Lord. What a wonderful feeling, to be
cooking for the Supreme Lord! This actually freed us from the control of
the tongue.

Finally, we were ready to become involved fully in temple life. By
Krsna's grace, I obtained a job near a temple in Texas and began to take
part in all the temple programs. In this way, all the anarthas
disappeared, just as Srila Prabhupada had predicted. It was like having
a burden lifted from our shoulders. We were no longer servants of our
senses, but servants of God and His devotees. The value of Srila
Prabhupada's instructions had become clear. A human being is not meant
to labor like an ass and enjoy like a dog. Purification means coming to
a higher level of consciousness.

Even though I have been initiated, I still admire my Godbrothers'
Spiritual awareness and wish to advance. Actually, initiation is the
beginning.

Brahmatirtha dasa Adhikari
(Bob Cohen)

Houston, Texas

“Perfect Questions - Perfect Answers” Conversations between His Divine
Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada and Bob Cohen, a Peace Corps
worker in India.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this electronic
file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own private
use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation
copy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright
information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) of
this book in any media without the express written permission from the
copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:
“Excerpted from “Perfect Questions — Perfect Answers” by the
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”

This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.
