Srila Prabhupada: Yes. That is not possible for any human being. A human
being has imperfect senses. So how can he teach perfect knowledge?
Suppose you see the sun as a disc. You have no means to approach the
sun. If you say that we can see the sun by telescope and this and that,
they are also made by you, and you are imperfect. So how can your
machine be perfect? Therefore, your knowledge of the sun is imperfect.
So don't teach about the sun unless you have perfect knowledge. That is
cheating.

Bob: But what about to teach that it is supposed that the sun is
93,000,000 miles away?

Srila Prabhupada: As soon as you say "it is supposed," it is not
scientific.

Bob: But I think that almost all science, then, 1S not scientific.
Srila Prabhupada: That is the point!

Bob: All science is based on, you know, Suppositions of this or that.
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. They are teaching imperfectly. Just like they are
advertising so much about the moon. Do you think their knowledge is
perfect?

Bob: No.

Srila Prabhupada: Then?

Bob: What is the proper duty of the teacher in society? Let us say a
science teacher. What should he be doing in the classroom?

Srila Prabhupada: Classroom? You should simply teach about Krsna.

Bob: He should not teach about...

Srila Prabhupada: No. That will include everything. His aim should be to
know Krsna.

Bob: Can a scientist teach the science of combining acid and alkaline,
and this kind of science, with Krsna as its object?

Srila Prabhupada: How can it be?

Bob: If you--when one studies science, one finds general tendencies of
nature, and these general tendencies of nature point to a controlling
force....

Srila Prabhupada: That I was explaining the other day. I asked one
chemist whether, according to chemical formulas, hydrogen and oxygen
linked together become water. Do they not?

Bob: It's true.

Srila Prabhupada: Now, there is a vast amount of water in the Atlantic
Ocean and Pacific Ocean. What quantity of chemicals was required?

Bob: How much?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. How many tons?

Bob: Many!

Srila Prabhupada: So who supplied it?

Bob: This was supplied by God.

Srila Prabhupada: Somebody must have supplied it.

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: So that is science. You can teach like that.

Bob: Should one bother teaching that if you combine acid and alkaline
they form a neutral?

Srila Prabhupada: The same thing. There are so many effervescents. So,
who is performing it? Who is supplying the acid and alkaline? [There is
a long pause.]

Bob: So this comes from the same source as the water.

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. You cannot manufacture water unless you have
hydrogen and oxygen. So, here iS a vast--not only this Atlantic or
Pacific: there are millions of planets, and there are millions of
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. So who created this water with hydrogen and
oxygen, and how was it supplied? That is our question. Somebody must
have supplied it, otherwise how has it come into existence?

Bob: But should it also be taught how you make water from hydrogen and
oxygen? The procedure of burning them together--should this also be
taught? That is, you burn hydrogen and oxygen together...

Srila Prabhupada: That is secondary. That is not very difficult. Just
like Malati made this puri [a kind of bread]. So, there is flour, and
there is ghee [clarified butter], and she made a puri. But unless there
is ghee and flour, where is the chance of making a puri? In the
Bhagavad-gita there is this statement: "Water, earth, air, fire--they
are My energies." What is your body? This external body--that is your
energy. Do you know that? Your body is made out of your energy. For
example, I am eating...

Bob: Yes.

Srila Prabhupada: So I am creating some energy, and therefore my body is
maintained.

Bob: Oh, I see.

Srila Prabhupada: So therefore your body is made out of your energy.
Bob: But when you eat the food, there is energy from the sun in the
food.

Srila Prabhupada: So, I am giving an example. I am creating some energy
by digesting the food, and that is maintaining my body. If your energy
supply is not proper, then your body becomes weak or unhealthy. Your
body is made out of your own energy. Similarly, this gigantic cosmic
body--the universe--1is made of Krsna's energy. How can you deny it? As
your body is made out of your energy, similarly the universal body must
be made by somebody's energy. That is Krsna. [There is a long pause. ]
Bob: I'll have to think about it to follow that.

Srila Prabhupada: What is to follow? It is a fact. [He laughs.] Your
hair 1S growing daily. Why? Because you have some energy.

Bob: The energy I obtain from my food.

Srila Prabhupada: Somehow or other you have obtained that energy! And
through that energy your hair is growing. So if your body is
manufactured by your energy, similarly the whole gigantic manifestation
is made of God's energy. It is a fact! It is not your energy.

Bob: Yes. Oh, I see that.

A devotee: Just like--aren't the planets in this universe the sun's
energy--a product of the sun's energy?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but who produced the sun? That is Krsna's energy.
Because it is heat, and Krsna says, bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh: "Heat--that
is My energy." The sun is the representation of the heating energy of
Krsna. It is not your energy. You cannot say, "The sun is made by me."
But somebody must have made it, and Krsna says that He did. So, we
believe Krsna. Therefore we are Krsna-ites.

Bob: Krsna-ites?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Our knowledge is perfect. If I say that heat is
the energy of Krsna, you cannot deny it, because it is not your energy.
In your body there 1S some certain amount of heat. Similarly, heat is
someone's energy. And who is that person? That is Krsna. Krsna says,
"Yes, it is My energy." So my knowledge is perfect. Because I take the
version of the greatest scientist, I am the greatest scientist. I may be
a fool personally, but because I take knowledge from the greatest
scientist, I am the greatest scientist. I have no difficulty.

Bob: Excuse me?

Srila Prabhupada: I have no difficulty in becoming the greatest
scientist because I take the knowledge from the greatest scientist.
[There 1S a long pause.] "This earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence and ego--they are My eight separated energies."

Bob: They are separated energies?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Just like this milk. What is this milk? The
separated energy of the cow. [Syamasundara and Bob, stunned, laugh in
realization.] Is it not? It is the manifestation of the separated energy
of the cow.

Syamasundara: Is it like a by-product?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes.

Bob: So, what is the significance of this energy's being separated from
Krsna?

Srila Prabhupada: "Separated" means that this is made out of the body of
the cow but it is not the cow. That is Separation.

Bob: So, this earth and all is made out of Krsna but it is not Krsna?
Srila Prabhupada: It is not Krsna. Or, you can say, Krsna and not Krsna
Simultaneously. That is our philosophy. One and different. You cannot
say that these things are different from Krsna, because without Krsna
they have no existence. At the same time, you cannot say, "Then let me
worship water. Why Krsna? The pantheists say that because everything is
God, whatever we do is God worship. This is Mayavada philosophy--that
because everything is made of God, therefore everything is God. But our
philosophy is that everything is God but also not God.

Bob: So what on earth is God? Is there anything on earth that is God?
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Because everything is made out of the energy of
God. But that does not mean that by worshiping anything you are
worshiping God.

Bob: So what iS on earth that is not maya [illusion]? It is..

Srila Prabhupada: Maya means "energy."

Bob: It means energy?

Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Maya--and another meaning is "illusion." So
foolish persons accept the energy as the energetic. That is maya. Just
like sunshine. Sunshine enters your room. Sunshine is the energy of the
sun. But because the sunshine enters your room, you cannot say that the
sun

Srila Prabhupada: Just wire.

Bob: So if I build a statue of Krsna, it is not Krsna unless...

Srila Prabhupada: It is Krsna. But you have to know the process of
understanding that it is Krsna. It is Krsna.

Bob: It is not just earth and mud.

Srila Prabhupada: No. Earth has no separate existence without Krsna.
Krsna says, "My energy." You cannot separate the energy from the
energetic. It is not possible. You cannot separate heat from fire. But
fire is different from the heat, and heat is different from the fire.
You are taking heat; that does not mean you are touching fire. Fire, in
Spite of emanating heat, keeps its identity. Similarly, although Krsna,
by His different energies, is creating everything, He remains Krsna. The
Mayavadi philosophers think that if Krsna is everything, then Krsna's
separate identity is lost. That is material thinking. For example, by
drinking this milk, little by little, when I finish, there is no more
milk; it has gone to my belly. Krsna is not like that. He is omnipotent.
We are utilizing His energy continually; still He is there, present.
Just like a man begetting children unlimitedly, but the man is there. A
crude example. It's not that because he has produced hundreds of
children, he is finished. So, similarly, God or Krsna, in spite of His
unlimited number of children, is there.

purnasya purnam adaya
purnam evavasisyate

"Because He is the complete whole, even though so many complete
units emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance." This is Krsna
consciousness. Krsna is never finished. Krsna is so powerful. Therefore
He is all-attractive. This is one side of the display of Krsna's energy.
Similarly, He has unlimited energies. This study of Krsna's energy is
only one side, or a portion only. So in this way, if you go on studying
Krsna, that 1S Krsna consciousness. It is not a bogus thing--"maybe,"
"perhaps not." Absolutely! It is!

Syamasundara: And the study itself is never finished.
Srila Prabhupada: No. How can it be? Krsna has unlimited energy.

Chapter Two

Vedic Culture: Varnasrama-dharma

Bob: I've asked devotees about how they feel towards sex in their
relations, and I see the way they feel, but I can't see myself acting
the same way. See, I'll be getting married at the end of this summer.
Srila Prabhupada: Hm-m?

Bob: I'll be getting married at the end of this summer, in September or
August when I return to America. And the devotees say that the
householders only have sex to conceive a child, and I cannot picture
myself at all in such a position, and--What kind of sex life can one
lead, living in the material world?

Srila Prabhupada: The Vedic principle is that one should avoid sex life
altogether. The whole Vedic principle is to get liberation from material
bondage. There are different attachments for material enjoyment, of
which sex life is the topmost enjoyment. The Bhagavatam says that this
material world...

pumsah striya mithuni-bhavam etam

Man is attached to woman, and woman is attached to man. Not only in
human society--in animal society also. That attachment is the basic
principle of material life. So, a woman is hankering or seeking after
the association of a man, and aman is hankering or seeking for the
association of a woman. All the fiction novels, dramas, cinema and even
ordinary advertisements that you see simply depict the attachment
between man and woman. Even in the tailor's shop you will find in the
window some woman and some man.

pravrttir esa bhutanam
nivrttis tu mahaphalam

So this attachment is already there.
Bob: Attachment between man and woman?
Srila Prabhupada: Man and woman. So if you want to get liberation from
this material world, then that attachment should be reduced to nil.
Otherwise, simply further attachment--You will have to take rebirth,
either as a human being or as a demigod or as an animal, as a serpent,
as a bird, as a beast. You will have to take birth. So, this basic
principle of increasing attachment is not our business, although it is
the general tendency. Grha, ksetra, suta [home, land, sons]. But if one
can reduce and stop it, that is first class. Therefore our Vedic system
is to first of all train a boy as a brahmacari--no sex life. The Vedic
principle is to reduce attachment, not to increase it. Therefore the
whole system is called varnasrama-dharma. The Indian system calls for
varna and asrama--four social orders and four spiritual orders.
Brahmacarya [celibate student life], grhastha [married life],
vanaprastha [retired life] and sannyasa [renounced life]--these are the
Spiritual orders. And the social orders consist of brahmanas
[intellectuals], ksatriyas [administrators], vaisyas [merchants and
farmers] and sudras [ordinary workers]. So under this system, the
regulative principles are so nice that
even if one has the tendency to enjoy material life, he is so nicely
molded that at last he achieves liberation and goes back home, back to
Godhead. This is the process. So sex life is not required, but because
we are attached to it, therefore there are some regulative principles
under which it is maintained.
[chanting starts somewhere in the background, with exotic mrdanga
drumbeats amidst laughing and the loud blowing of horns. |]
Srila Prabhupada: It is said in Srimad-Bhagavatam that-
pumsah striya mithuni-bhavam etam
tayor mitho hrdaya-granthim ahuh
ato grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair
jJanasya moho 'yam aham mamet1
(SB. 5.5.8)

This sex life is the basic principle of material life--attachment
for man or woman. And when they are united, when a man and woman are
united, that attachment becomes increased, and that increased attachment
will induce one to accumulate grha (a home), ksetra (land), suta
(children), apta (friendship or society) and vitta. Vita means money. In
this way--grha-ksetra-sutapta-vittaih--he becomes entangled. janasya
moho 'yam: this is the illusion. And by this illusion he thinks, aham
mameti: "I am this body, and anything in relationship with this body is
mine."

Bob: What is that again?

Srila Prabhupada: This attachment increases. The material attachment
involves thinking, "I am this body, and because I have this body ina
particular place, that is my country." And that is going on: "I am
American, I am Indian, I am German, I am this, I am that--this body.
This 1s my country. I Shall sacrifice everything for my country and
society." So in this way, the illusion increases. And under this
illusion, when he dies he gets another body. That may be a superior body
